

=== PAGE 1 ===
Bao: Learning to Steer Query Optimizers
Ryan Marcus 12, Parimarjan Negi 1, Hongzi Mao 1,
Nesime T atbul12, Mohammad Alizadeh 1, Tim Kraska 1
1MIT CSAIL 2Intel Labs
{ryanmarcus, pnegi, hongzi, tatbul, alizadeh, kraska}@csail.mit.edu
ABSTRACT
Query optimization remains one of the most challenging
problems in data management systems. Recent eﬀorts to
apply machine learning techniques to query optimization
challenges have been promising, but have shown few prac-
tical gains due to substantive training overhead, inability
to adapt to changes, and poor tail performance. Motivated
by these diﬃculties and drawing upon a long history of re-
search in multi-armed bandits, we introduce Bao (the Bandit
optimizer). Bao takes advantage of the wisdom built into
existing query optimizers by providing per-query optimiza-
tion hints. Bao combines modern tree convolutional neu-
ral networks with Thompson sampling, a decades-old and
well-studied reinforcement learning algorithm. As a result,
Bao automatically learns from its mistakes and adapts to
changes in query workloads, data, and schema. Experimen-
tally, we demonstrate that Bao can quickly (an order of mag-
nitude faster than previous approaches) learn strategies that
improve end-to-end query execution performance, including
tail latency. In cloud environments, we show that Bao can
oﬀer both reduced costs and better performance compared
with a sophisticated commercial system.
1. INTRODUCTION
Query optimization is an important task for database man-
agement systems. Despite decades of study [59], the most
important elements of query optimization – cardinality esti-
mation and cost modeling – have proven diﬃcult to crack [34].
Several works have applied machine learning techniques
to these stubborn problems [27, 29, 33, 39, 41, 47, 60, 61, 64].
While all of these new solutions demonstrate remarkable re-
sults, they suﬀer from fundamental limitations that prevent
them from being integrated into a real-world DBMS. Most
notably, these techniques (including those coming from au-
thors of this paper) suﬀer from three main drawbacks:
1. Sample eﬃciency. Most proposed machine learning tech-
niques require an impractical amount of training data before
they have a positive impact on query performance. For ex-
ample, ML-powered cardinality estimators require gather-
ing precise cardinalities from the underlying data, a pro-
hibitively expensive operation in practice (this is why we
wish to estimate cardinalities in the ﬁrst place). Reinforce-
ment learning techniques must process thousands of queries
before outperforming traditional optimizers, which (when
accounting for data collection and model training) can take
on the order of days [29,39].
16b 24b
JOB Query
0
20
40
60Query latency (seconds)
60.2s
0.4s
21.2s 19.7s
PostgreSQL
PostgreSQL (no loop join)
Figure 1: Disabling the loop join operator in PostgreSQL
can improve (16b) or harm (24b) a particular query’s per-
formance. These example queries are from the Join Order
Benchmark (JOB) [30].
2. Brittleness. While performing expensive training oper-
ations once may already be impractical, changes in query
workload, data, or schema can make matters worse. Learned
cardinality estimators must be retrained when data changes,
or risk becoming stale. Several proposed reinforcement learn-
ing techniques assume that both the data and the schema
remain constant, and require complete retraining when this
is not the case [29,39,41,47].
3. Tail catastrophe. Recent work has shown that learning
techniques can outperform traditional optimizers on aver-
age, but often perform catastrophically (e.g., 100x regres-
sion in query performance) in the tail [39, 41, 48]. This is
especially true when training data is sparse. While some
approaches oﬀer statistical guarantees of their dominance in
the average case [64], such failures, even if rare, are unac-
ceptable in many real world applications.
Bao Bao (Bandit optimizer), our prototype optimizer, can
outperform traditional query optimizers, both open-source
and commercial , with minimal training time ( ≈ 1 hour).
Bao can maintain this advantage even in the presence of
workload, data, and schema changes, all while rarely, if ever,
incurring a catastrophic execution. While previous learned
approaches either did not improve or did not evaluate tail
performance, we show that Bao is capable of improving tail
performance by orders of magnitude after a few hours of
training. Finally, we demonstrate that Bao is capable of
reducing costs and increasing performance on modern cloud
platforms in realistic, warm-cache scenarios.
1
arXiv:2004.03814v1  [cs.DB]  8 Apr 2020

=== PAGE 2 ===
Our fundamental observation is that previous learned ap-
proaches to query optimization [29, 39, 41, 64], which at-
tempted to replace either the entire query optimizer or large
portions of it with learned components, may have thrown the
baby out with the bathwater. Instead of discarding tradi-
tional query optimizers in favor of a fully-learned approach,
Bao recognizes that traditional query optimizers contain
decades of meticulously hand-encoded wisdom. For a given
query, Bao intends only to steer a query optimizer in the
right direction using coarse-grained hints. In other words,
Bao seeks to build learned components on top of existing
query optimizers in order to enhance query optimization,
rather than replacing or discarding traditional query opti-
mizers altogether.
For example, a common observation about PostgreSQL
is that cardinality under-estimates frequently prompt the
query optimizer to select loop joins when other methods
(merge, hash) would be more eﬀective [30, 31]. This occurs
in query 16b of the Join Order Benchmark (JOB) [30], as
depicted in Figure 1. Disabling loop joins causes a 3x per-
formance improvement for this query. However, for query
24b, disabling loop joins creates a serious regression of al-
most 50x. Thus, providing the coarse-grained hint “disable
loop joins” helps some queries, but harms others.
At a high level, Bao sits on top of an existing query opti-
mizer and tries to learn a mapping between incoming queries
and the powerset of such hints. Given an incoming query,
Bao selects a set of coarse-grained hints that limit the search
space of the query optimizer (e.g., eliminating plans with
loop joins from the search space). Bao learns to select dif-
ferent hints for diﬀerent queries, discovering when the under-
lying query optimizer needs to be steered away from certain
areas of the plan space.
Our approach assumes a ﬁnite set of query hints and treats
each subset of hints as an arm in a contextual multi-armed
bandit problem. While in this work we use query hints that
remove entire operator types from the plan space (e.g., no
hash joins), in practice there is no restriction that these
hints are so broad: one could use much more speciﬁc hints.
Our system learns a model that predicts which set of hints
will lead to good performance for a particular query. When a
query arrives, our system selects hints, executes the resulting
query plan, and observes a reward. Over time, our system
reﬁnes its model to more accurately predict which hints will
most beneﬁt an incoming query. For example, for a highly
selective query, our system can steer an optimizer towards
a left-deep loop join plan (by restricting the optimizer from
using hash or merge joins), and to disable loop joins for less
selective queries. This learning is automatic.
By formulating the problem as a contextual multi-armed
bandit, Bao can take advantage of sample eﬃcient and well-
studied algorithms [12]. Because Bao takes advantage of an
underlying query optimizer, Bao has cost and cardinality
estimates available, allowing Bao to use a more ﬂexible rep-
resentation that can adapt to new data and schema changes
just as well as the underlying query optimizer. Finally, while
other learned query optimization methods have to relearn
what traditional query optimizers already know, Bao can
immediately start learning to improve the underlying opti-
mizer, and is able to reduce tail latency even compared to
traditional query optimizers.
Interestingly, it is easy to integrate information about the
DBMS cache into our approach. Doing so allows Bao to
use information about what is held in memory when choos-
ing between diﬀerent hints. This is a desirable feature be-
cause reading data from in-memory cache is signiﬁcantly
faster than reading information oﬀ of disk, and it is possi-
ble that the best plan for a query changes based on what is
cached. While integrating such a feature into a traditional
cost-based optimizer may require signiﬁcant engineering and
hand-tuning, making Bao cache-aware is as simple as sur-
facing a description of the cache state.
A major concern for optimizer designers is the ability to
debug and explain decisions, which is itself a subject of
signiﬁcant research [6, 21, 46, 54]. Black-box deep learning
approaches make this diﬃcult, although progress is being
made [7]. Compared to other learned query optimization
techniques, Bao makes debugging easier. When a query mis-
behaves, an engineer can examine the query hint chosen by
Bao. If the underlying optimizer is functioning correctly, but
Bao made a poor decision, exception rules can be written
to exclude the selected query hint. While we never needed
to implement any such exception rules in our experimental
study, Bao’s architecture makes such exception rules signiﬁ-
cantly easier to implement than for other black-box learning
models.
Bao’s architecture is extensible. Query hints can be added
or removed over time. Assuming additional hints do not lead
to query plans containing entirely new physical operators,
adding a new query hint requires little additional training
time. This potentially enables quickly testing of new query
optimizers: a developer can introduce a hint that causes
the DBMS to use a diﬀerent optimizer, and Bao will au-
tomatically learn which queries perform well with the new
optimizer (and which queries perform poorly).
In short, Bao combines a tree convolution model [44], an
intuitive neural network operator that can recognize impor-
tant patterns in query plan trees [39], with Thompson sam-
pling [62], a technique for solving contextual multi-armed
bandit problems. This unique combination allows Bao to
explore and exploit knowledge quickly.
The contributions of this paper are:
• We introduce Bao, a learned system for query opti-
mization that is capable of learning how to apply query
hints on a case-by-case basis.
• We introduce a simple predictive model and featuriza-
tion scheme that is independent of the workload, data,
and schema.
• For the ﬁrst time, we demonstrate a learned query op-
timization system that outperforms both open source
and commercial systems in cost and latency, all while
adapting to changes in workload, data, and schema.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2,
we introduce the Bao system model and give a high-level
overview of the learning approach. In Section 3, we formally
specify Bao’s optimization goal, and describe the predictive
model and training loop used. We present related works in
Section 4, experimental analysis in Section 5, and concluding
remarks in Section 6.
2. SYSTEM MODEL
Bao’s system model is shown in Figure 2. When a user
submits a query, Bao’s goal is to select a set of query hints
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
SQLSQLSQL
Parser
Query Optimizer
Hint set 1
...
TCNN
Reward
Predictions
Execution Engine
ExperienceTraining
User provided
Query plan
External component
Bao
...
Hint set 2
Hint set 3
Figure 2: Bao system model
that will give the best performance for the user’s speciﬁc
query (i.e., Bao chooses diﬀerent query hints for diﬀerent
queries). To do so, Bao uses the underlying query optimizer
to produce a set of query plans (one for each set of hints),
and each query plan is transformed into a vector tree (a tree
where each node is a feature vector). These vector trees are
fed into Bao’s predictive model, a tree convolutional neural
network [44], which predicts the outcome of executing each
plan (e.g., predicts the wall clock time of each query plan). 1
Bao chooses which plan to execute using a technique called
Thompson sampling [62] (see Section 3) to balance the ex-
ploration of new plans with the exploitation of plans known
to be fast. The plan selected by Bao is sent to a query ex-
ecution engine. Once the query execution is complete, the
combination of the selected query plan and the observed
performance is added to Bao’s experience. Periodically, this
experience is used to retrain the predictive model, creating a
feedback loop. As a result, Bao’s predictive model improves,
and Bao learns to select better and better query hints.
Query hints & hint sets Bao requires a set of query opti-
mizer hints, which we refer to as query hints or hints. A hint
is generally a ﬂag passed to the query optimizer that alters
the behavior of the optimizer in some way. For example,
PostgreSQL [4], MySQL [3], and SQL Server [5] all provide
a wide range of such hints. While some hints can be applied
to a single relation or predicate, Bao focuses only on query
hints that are a boolean ﬂag (e.g., disable loop join, force in-
dex usage). For each incoming query, Bao selects ahint set, a
valid set of query hints, to pass to the optimizer. We assume
that the validity of a hint set is known ahead of time (e.g.,
for PostgreSQL, one cannot disable loop joins, merge joins,
and hash joins at once). We assume that all valid hint sets
cause the optimizer to produce a semantically-valid query
plan (i.e., a query plan that produces the correct result).
Model training Bao’s predictive model is responsible for
estimating the quality of query plans produced by a hint
set. Learning to predict plan quality requires balancing ex-
ploration and exploitation: Bao must decide when to explore
new plans that might lead to improvements, and when to ex-
ploit existing knowledge and select plans similar to fast plans
seen in the past. We formulate the problem of choosing be-
tween query plans as a contextual multi-armed bandit [69]
problem: each hint set represents an arm, and the query
plans produced by the optimizer (when given each hint set)
represent the contextual information. To solve the bandit
problem, we use Thompson sampling [62], an algorithm with
1This process can be executed in parallel to maintain rea-
sonable optimization times, see Section 5.2.
both theoretical bounds [57] and real-world success [12]. The
details of our approach are presented in Section 3.
Mixing query plans Bao selects an query plan produced
by a single hint set. Bao does not attempt to “stitch to-
gether” [15] query plans from diﬀerent hint sets. While pos-
sible, this would increase the Bao’s action space (the number
of choices Bao has for each query). Letting k be the number
of hint sets and n be the number of relations in a query,
by selecting only a single hint set Bao has O(k) choices per
query. If Bao stitched together query plans, the size of the
action space would beO(k×2n) (k diﬀerent ways to join each
subset of n relations, in the case of a fully connected query
graph). This is a larger action space than used in previous
reinforcement learning for query optimization works [39,41].
Since the size of the action space is an important factor for
determining the convergence time of reinforcement learning
algorithms [16], we opted for the smaller action space in
hopes of achieving quick convergence. 2
3. SELECTING QUERY HINTS
Here, we discuss Bao’s learning approach. We ﬁrst deﬁne
Bao’s optimization goal, and formalize it as a contextual
multi-armed bandit problem. Then, we apply Thompson
sampling, a classical technique used to solve such problems.
Bao assumes that each hint set HSeti∈F in the family
of hint sets F is a function mapping a query q∈ Q to a
query plan tree t∈T :
HSeti :Q→T
This function is realized by passing the query Q and the
selected hint HSeti to the underlying query optimizer. We
refer to HSeti as this function for convenience. We assume
that each query plan tree t∈T is composed of an arbitrary
number of operators drawn from a known ﬁnite set (i.e.,
that the trees may be arbitrarily large but all of the distinct
operator types are known ahead of time).
Bao also assumes a user-deﬁned performance metric P ,
which determines the quality of a query plan by executing
it. For example, P may measure the execution time of a
query plan, or may measure the number of disk operations
performed by the plan.
For a query q, Bao must select a hint set to use. We call
this selection function B : Q→ F . Bao’s goal is to select
the best query plan (in terms of the performance metric P )
produced by a hint set. We formalize the goal as a regret
minimization problem, where the regret for a query q, Rq,
is deﬁned as the diﬀerence between the performance of the
plan produced with the hint set selected by Bao and the
performance of the plan produced with the ideal hint set:
Rq =
(
P (B(q)(q))− min
i
P (HSeti(q))
)2
(1)
Contextual multi-armed bandits (CMABs) The re-
gret minimization problem in Equation 1 can be thought of
in terms of a contextual multi-armed bandit [69], a classic
concept from reinforcement learning. A CMAB is problem
formulation in which an agent must maximize their reward
2We experimentally tested the plan stitching approach using
Bao’s architecture, but we were unable to get the model to
convergence.
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
by repeatedly selecting from a ﬁxed number of arms. The
agent ﬁrst receives some contextual information ( context),
and must then select an arm. Each time an arm is selected,
the agent receives a payout. The payout of each arm is
assumed to be independent given the contextual informa-
tion. After receiving the payout, the agent receives a new
context and must select another arm. Each trial is consid-
ered independent. The agent can maximize their payouts
by minimizing their regret: the closer the agent’s actions
are to optimal, the closer to the maximum possible payout
the agent gets.
For Bao, each “arm” is a hint set, and the “context” is
the set of query plans produced by the underlying optimizer
given each hint set. Thus, our agent observes the query
plans produced from each hint set, chooses one of those
plans, and receives a reward based on the resulting perfor-
mance. Over time, our agent needs to improve its selection
and get closer to choosing optimally (i.e., minimize regret).
Doing so involves balancing exploration and exploitation:
our agent must not always select a query plan randomly (as
this would not help to improve performance), nor must our
agent blindly use the ﬁrst query plan it encounters with good
performance (as this may leave signiﬁcant improvements on
the table).
Thompson sampling A classic algorithm for solving CMAB
regret minimization problems while balancing exploration
and exploitation is Thompson sampling [62]. Intuitively,
Thompson sampling works by slowly building up experience
(i.e., past observations of performance and query plan tree
pairs). Periodically, that experience is used to construct
a predictive model to estimate the performance of a query
plan. This predictive model is used to select hint sets by
choosing the hint set that results in the plan with the best
predicted performance.
Formally, Bao uses a predictive model Mθ, with model
parameters (weights) θ, which maps query plan trees to es-
timated performance, in order to select a hint set. Once a
query plan is selected, the plan is executed, and the resulting
pair of a query plan tree and the observed performance met-
ric, (ti,P (ti)), is added to Bao’s experience E. Whenever
new information is added to E, Bao updates the predictive
model Mθ.
In Thompson sampling, this predictive model is trained
diﬀerently than a standard machine learning model. Most
machine learning algorithms train models by searching for a
set of parameters that are most likely to explain the train-
ing data. In this sense, the quality of a particular set of
model parametersθ is measured byP (θ|E): the higher the
likelihood of your model parameters given the training data,
the better the ﬁt. Thus, the most likely model parameters
can be expressed as the expectation (modal parameters) of
this distribution, which we write as E[P (θ| E)]. However,
in order to balance exploitation and exploration, we sample
model parameters from the distribution P (θ| E), whereas
most machine learning techniques are designed to ﬁnd the
most likely model given the training data, E[P (θ|E)].
Intuitively, if one wished to maximize exploration, one
would choose θ entirely at random. If one wished to maxi-
mize exploitation, one would choose the modalθ (i.e., E[P (θ|
E)]). Sampling from P (θ | E) strikes a balance between
these two goals [8]. To reiterate, sampling from P (θ|E) is
not the same as training a model over E. We discuss the
diﬀerences at the end of Section 3.1.2.
Aggregate
Seq Scan Idx Scan
Merge Join
Loop Join
Seq ScanSort
Aggregate
Seq Scan Idx Scan
Merge Join
Loop Join
Seq ScanSort
null
null
Original Query Plan Binarized Query Plan
Figure 3: Binarizing a query plan tree
It is worth noting that selecting a hint set for an incom-
ing query is not exactly a bandit problem. This is because
the choice of a hint set, and thus a query plan, will aﬀect
the cache state when the next query arrives, and thus every
decision is not entirely independent. For example, choosing
a plan with index scans will result in an index being cached,
whereas choosing a plan with only sequential scans may re-
sult in more of the base relation being cached. However, in
OLAP environments queries frequently read large amounts
of data, so the eﬀect of a single query plan on the cache
tends to be short lived. Regardless, there is substantial ex-
perimental evidence suggesting that Thompson sampling is
still a suitable algorithm in these scenarios [12].
We next explain Bao’s predictive model, a tree convolu-
tional neural network. Then, in Section 3.2, we discuss how
Bao eﬀectively applies its predictive model and Thompson
sampling to query optimization.
3.1 Predictive model
The core of Thompson sampling, Bao’s algorithm for se-
lecting hint sets on a per-query basis, is a predictive model
that, in our context, estimates the performance of a par-
ticular query plan. Based on their success in [39], Bao use
a tree convolutional neural network (TCNN) as its predic-
tive model. In this section, we describe (1) how query plan
trees are transformed into trees of vectors, suitable as input
to a TCNN, (2) the TCNN architecture, and (3) how the
TCNN can be integrated into a Thompson sampling regime
(i.e., how to sample model parameters from P (θ | E) as
discussed in Section 3).
3.1.1 V ectorizing query plan trees
Bao transforms query plan trees into trees of vectors by
binarizing the query plan tree and encoding each query plan
operator as a vector, optionally augmenting this representa-
tion with cache information.
Binarization Previous applications of reinforcement learn-
ing to query optimization [29,39,41] assumed that all query
plan trees were strictly binary: every node in a query plan
tree had either two children (an internal node) or zero chil-
dren (a leaf). While this is true for a large class of simple
join queries, most analytic queries involve non-binary op-
erations like aggregation, sorting, and hashing. However,
strictly binary query plan trees are convenient for a number
of reasons, most notably that they greatly simplify tree con-
volution (explained in the next section). Thus, we propose
a simple strategy to transform non-binary query plans into
binary ones. Figure 3 shows an example of this process. The
original query plan tree (left) is transformed into a binary
query plan tree (right) by inserting “null” nodes (gray) as
the right child of any node with a single parent. Nodes with
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
Aggregate[1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 10, 0.98]
Agg
Merge
Sort
Loop
Seq
Idx null
Card.
Cost
Merge Join[1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 10, 0.98]
Agg
Merge
Sort
Loop
Seq
Idx null
Card.
Cost
Sort[0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 250, 0.62]
Agg
Merge
Sort
Loop
Seq
Idx null
Card.
Cost
Loop Join[0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 25, 0.53]
Agg
Merge
Sort
Loop
Seq
Idx null
Card.
Cost
Seq Scan[0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 9000, 0.12]
Agg
Merge
Sort
Loop
Seq
Idx null
Card.
Cost
null [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0.0]
Agg
Merge
Sort
Loop
Seq
Idx null
Card.
Cost
Seq Scan [0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 100, 0.32]
Agg
Merge
Sort
Loop
Seq
Idx null
Card.
Cost
null [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0.0]
Agg
Merge
Sort
Loop
Seq
Idx null
Card.
Cost
Idx Scan [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 25, 0.08]
Agg
Merge
Sort
Loop
Seq
Idx null
Card.
Cost
Figure 4: Vectorized query plan tree (vector tree)
more than two children (e.g., multi-unions) are uncommon,
but can generally be binarized by splitting them up into a
left-deep tree of binary operations (e.g., a union of 5 children
is transformed into a left-deep tree with four binary union
operators).
V ectorization Bao’s vectorization strategy produces vec-
tors with few components. Each node in a query plan tree
is transformed into a vector containing three parts: (1) a one
hot encoding of the operator type, (2) cardinality and cost
model information, and optionally (3) cache information.
The one-hot encoding of each operator type is similar to
vectorization strategies used by previous approaches [29,39].
Each vector in Figure 4 begins with the one-hot encoding
of the operator type (e.g., the second position is used to
indicate if an operator is a merge join). This simple one-hot
encoding captures information about structural properties
of the query plan tree: for example, a merge join with a
child that is not sort might indicate that more than one
operator is taking advantage of a sorted order.
Each vector can also contain information about estimated
cardinality and cost. Since almost all query optimizers make
use of such information, surfacing it to the vector represen-
tation of each query plan tree node is often trivial. For ex-
ample, in Figure 4, cardinality and cost model information
is labeled “Card” and “Cost” respectively. This information
helps encode if an operator is potentially problematic, such
a loop joins over large relations or repetitive sorting, which
might be indicative of a poor query plan. While we use only
two values (one for a cardinality estimate, the other for a
cost estimate), any number of values can be used. For exam-
ple, multiple cardinality estimates from diﬀerent estimators
or predictions from learned cost models may be added.
Finally, optionally, each vector can be augmented with
information from the current state of the disk cache. The
current state of the cache can be retrieved from the database
buﬀer pool when a new query arrives. In our experiments,
we augment each scan node with the percentage of the tar-
geted ﬁle that is cached, although many other schemes can
be used. This gives Bao the opportunity to pick plans that
are compatible with information in the cache.
While simple, Bao’s vectorization scheme has a number of
advantages. First, the representation is agnostic to the un-
derlying schema: while prior work [29,39,41] represented ta-
bles and columns directly in their vectorization scheme, Bao
omits them so that schema changes do not necessitate start-
ing over from scratch. Second, Bao’s vectorization scheme
only represents the underlying data with cardinality esti-
mates and cost models, as opposed to complex embedding
models tied to the data [39]. Since maintaining cardinality
estimates when data changes is well-studied and already im-
plemented in most DBMSes, changes to the underlying data
are reﬂected cleanly in Bao’s vectorized representation.
Vectorized Tree
Tree Convolution
1x256 1x128 1x64
Fully Connected Layer
1 x 32
Fully Connected Layer
1 x 1
Dynam
ic Pooling
1 x 64LayerInput
Cost Prediction
Output
Figure 5: Bao prediction model architecture
3.1.2 Tree convolutional neural networks
Tree convolution is a composable and diﬀerentiable neural
network operator introduced in [44] for supervised program
analysis and ﬁrst applied to query plan trees in [39]. Here,
we give an intuitive overview of tree convolution, and re-
fer readers to [39] for technical details and analysis of tree
convolution on query plan trees.
As noted in [39], human experts studying query plans
learn to recognize good or bad plans by pattern matching: a
pipeline of merge joins without any intermediate sorts may
perform well, whereas a merge join on top of a hash join
may induce a redundant sort or hash. Similarly, a hash join
which builds a hash table over a very large relation may in-
cur a spill. While none of this patterns are independently
enough to decide if a query plan is good or bad, they do serve
as useful indicators for further analysis; in other words, the
presence or absence of such a pattern is a useful feature from
a learning prospective. Tree convolution is precisely suited
to recognize such patterns, and learns to do soautomatically,
from the data itself .
Tree convolution consists of sliding several tree-shaped
“ﬁlters” over a larger query plan tree (similar to image con-
volution, where ﬁlters in a ﬁlterbank are convolved with an
image) to produce a transformed query plan tree of the same
size. These ﬁlters may look for patterns like pairs of hash
joins, or an index scan over a very small relation. Tree con-
volution operators are stacked, resulting in several layers of
tree convolution. Later layers can learn to recognize more
complex patterns, like a long chain of merge joins or a bushy
tree of hash operators. Because of tree convolution’s natu-
ral ability to represent and learn these patterns, we say that
tree convolution represents a helpful inductive bias [38, 43]
for query optimization: that is, the structure of the net-
work, not just its parameters, are tuned to the underlying
problem.
The architecture of Bao’s prediction model (similar to
Neo’s value prediction model [39]) is shown in Figure 5. The
vectorized query plan tree is passed through three layers of
stacked tree convolution. After the last layer of tree con-
volution, dynamic pooling [44] is used to ﬂatten the tree
structure into a single vector. Then, two fully connected
layers are used to map the pooled vector to a performance
prediction. We use ReLU [18] activation functions and layer
normalization [10], which are not shown in the ﬁgure.
Integrating with Thompson sampling Thompson sam-
pling requires the ability tosample model parametersθ from
P (θ|E), whereas most machine learning techniques are de-
signed to ﬁnd the most likely model given the training data,
E[P (θ| E)]. For neural networks, there are several tech-
niques available to sample fromP (θ|E), ranging from com-
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
plex Bayesian neural networks to simple approaches [56]. By
far the simplest technique, which has been shown to work
well in practice [51], is to train the neural network as usual,
but on a “bootstrap” [11] of the training data: the network
is trained using|E| random samples drawn with replacement
from E, inducing the desired sampling properties [51]. We
selected this bootstrapping technique for its simplicity.
3.2 Training loop
In this section, we explain Bao’s training loop, which
closely follows a classical Thompson sampling regime: when
a query is received, Bao builds a query plan tree for each
hint set and then uses the current TCNN predictive model
to select a query plan tree to execute. After execution, that
query plan tree and the observed performance are added to
Bao’s experience. Periodically, Bao retrains its TCNN pre-
dictive model by sampling model parameters (i.e., neural
network weights) to balance exploration and exploitation.
While Bao closely follows a Thompson sampling regime for
solving a contextual multi-armed bandit, practical concerns
require a few deviations.
In classical Thompson sampling [62], the model parame-
ters θ are resampled after every selection (query). In the
context of query optimization, this is not practical for two
reasons. First, sampling θ requires training a neural net-
work, which is a time consuming process. Second, if the size
of the experience |E| grows unbounded as queries are pro-
cessed, the time to train the neural network will also grow
unbounded, as the time required to perform a training epoch
is linear in the number of training examples.
We use two techniques from prior work on using deep
learning for contextual multi-armed bandit problems [13] to
solve these issues. First, instead of resampling the model
parameters (i.e., retraining the neural network) after every
query, we only resample the parameters every nth query.
This obviously decreases the training overhead by a factor
ofn by using the same model parameters for more than one
query. Second, instead of allowing |E| to grow unbounded,
we only store thek most recent experiences inE. By tuning
n and k, the user can control the tradeoﬀ between model
quality and training overhead to their needs. We evaluate
this tradeoﬀ in Section 5.2.
We also introduce a new optimization, speciﬁcally useful
for query optimization. On modern cloud platforms such
as [2], GPUs can be attached and detached from a VM with
per-second billing. Since training a neural network primar-
ily uses the GPU, whereas query processing primarily uses
the CPU, disk, and RAM, model training and query execu-
tion can be overlapped. When new model parameters need
to be sampled, a GPU can be temporarily provisioned and
attached. Model training can then be oﬄoaded to the GPU,
leaving other resources available for query processing. Once
model training is complete, the new model parameters can
be swapped in for use when the next query arrives, and the
GPU can be detached. Of course, users may also choose to
use a machine with a dedicated GPU, or to oﬄoad model
training to a diﬀerent machine entirely.
4. RELA TED WORK
Recently, there has been a groundswell of research on in-
tegrating machine learning into query optimization. One
of the most obvious places in query optimization to apply
machine learning is cardinality estimation. One of the ear-
liest approaches was Leo [60], which used successive runs
of the similar queries to adjust histogram estimators. More
recent approaches [27, 33, 61, 67] have used deep learning
to learn cardinality estimations or query costs in a super-
vised fashion, although these works require extensive train-
ing data collection and do not adapt to changes in data
or schema. QuickSel [52] demonstrated that linear mixture
models could learn reasonable estimates for single tables.
Naru [68] uses an unsupervised learning approach which
does not require training and uses Monte Carlo integration
to produce estimates, again for materialized tables. In [22],
authors present a scheme called CRN for estimating car-
dinalities via query containment rates. While all of these
works demonstrate improved cardinality estimation accu-
racy, they do not provide evidence that these improvements
lead to better query performance. In an experimental study,
Ortiz et al. [48] show that certain learned cardinality estima-
tion techniques may improve mean performance on certain
datasets, but tail latency is not evaluated. In [45], Negi et
al. show how prioritizing training on cardinality estimations
that have a large impact on query performance can improve
estimation models.
Another line of research has examined using reinforcement
learning to construct query optimizers. Both [29,41] showed
that, with suﬃcient training, such approaches could ﬁnd
plans with lower costs according to the PostgreSQL opti-
mizer and cardinality estimator. [47] showed that the inter-
nal state learned by reinforcement learning algorithms are
strongly related to cardinality. Neo [39] showed that deep
reinforcement learning could be applied directly to query
latency, and could learn optimization strategies that were
competitive with commercial systems after 24 hours of train-
ing. However, none of these techniques are capable of han-
dling changes in schema, data, or query workload. Further-
more, while all of these techniques show improvements to
mean query performance after a long training period, none
demonstrate improvement in tail performance.
Works applying reinforcement learning to adaptive query
processing [24,64,65] have also shown interesting results, but
are not applicable to non-adaptive systems.
Thompson sampling has a long history in statistics and de-
cision making problems and recently it has been used exten-
sively in the reinforcement learning community as a simple
yet eﬃcient way to update beliefs given experience [12, 25,
62]. We use an alternative setup which lets us get the bene-
ﬁts of Thompson sampling without explicitly deﬁning how to
update the posterior belief, as described in [51]. Thompson
sampling has also been applied to cloud workload manage-
ment [40] and SLA conformance [49].
Reinforcement learning techniques in general have also
seen recent adoption [58]. In [28], the authors present a vi-
sion of an entire database system built from reinforcement
learning components. More concretely, reinforcement learn-
ing has been applied to managing elastic clusters [35, 50],
scheduling [36], and physical design [53].
Our work is part of a recent trend in seeking to use ma-
chine learning to build easy to use, adaptive, and inven-
tive systems, a trend more broadly known as machine pro-
gramming [19]. A few selected works outside the context
of data management systems include reinforcement learning
for job scheduling [37], automatic performance analysis [9],
loop vectorization [20] and garbage collection [23].
6

=== PAGE 7 ===
n1-2 n1-4 n1-8 n1-16
Machine Type
0
100
200
300
400
500Cost (cents)
n1-2 n1-4 n1-8 n1-16
Machine Type
0
100
200
300
400
500
600Time (m)
Bao
PostgreSQL
(a) Across four diﬀerent VM types, Bao on the PostgreSQL engine
vs. PostgreSQL optimizer on the PostgreSQL engine.
n1-2 n1-4 n1-8 n1-16
Machine Type
0
100
200
300
400
500Cost (cents)
n1-2 n1-4 n1-8 n1-16
Machine Type
0
100
200
300
400
500
600Time (m)
Bao
ComSys
(b) Across four diﬀerent VM types, Bao on the ComSys engine
vs. ComSys optimizer on the ComSys engine.
Figure 6: Cost (left) and workload latency (right) for Bao
and two traditional query optimizers across four diﬀerent
Google Cloud Platform VM sizes for the IMDb workload.
Corp IMDb Stack
Dataset
0
200
400
600
800
1000Cost (cents)
Corp IMDb Stack
Dataset
0
200
400
600
800
1000Time (m)
Bao
PostgreSQL
(a) Across our three evaluation datasets, Bao on the PostgreSQL
engine vs. PostgreSQL optimizer on the PostgreSQL engine.
Corp IMDb Stack
Dataset
0
200
400
600
800
1000Cost (cents)
Corp IMDb Stack
Dataset
0
200
400
600
800
1000Time (m)
Bao
ComSys
(b) Across our three evaluation datasets, Bao on the ComSys en-
gine vs. ComSys optimizer on the ComSys engine.
Figure 7: Cost (left) and workload latency (right) for Bao
and two traditional query optimizers across three diﬀerent
workloads on a N1-16 Google Cloud VM.
Size Queries WL Data Schema
IMDb 7.2 GB 5000 Dynamic Static Static
Stack 100 GB 5000 Dynamic Dynamic Static
Corp 1 TB 2000 Dynamic Static a Dynamic
Table 1: Evaluation dataset sizes, query counts, and
whether or not the workload (WL), data, and schema are
static or dynamic.
5. EXPERIMENTS
The key question we pose in our evaluation is whether
or not Bao could have a positive, practical impact on real-
world database workloads that include changes in workload,
data, and/or schema. To answer this, we focus on quantify-
ing not only query performance, but also on the dollar-cost
of executing a workload (including the training overhead in-
troduced by Bao) on cloud infrastructure.
Our experimental study is divided into three parts. In
Section 5.1, we explain our experimental setup. Section 5.2
is designed to evaluate Bao’s real-world applicability, and
compares Bao’s performance against both PostgreSQL and
a commercial database system [55] on real-world workloads
executed on Google Cloud Platform with caching enabled.
Speciﬁcally, we examine:
• workload performance, tail latency, and total costs for
executing workloads with Bao, the PostgreSQL opti-
mizer, and a commercial system with dynamic work-
loads, data, and schema,
• Bao’s resiliency to hints that induce consistent or sud-
den poor performance,
• quantitative and qualitative diﬀerences between Bao
and previous learned query optimization approaches.
Section 5.3 is designed to evaluate Bao’s optimality in
terms of regret, the diﬀerence between Bao’s decisions and
the optimal choice. Experiments in these sections are nec-
essarily conducted on a private, isolated server, and each
query is executed with a cold cache. This section evaluates:
• Bao’s ability to adapt to diﬀerent optimization goals
(e.g., disk IOs),
• the median and tail latency achieved by Bao relative to
an optimal choice and an open source query optimizer,
• Bao’s query-by-query performance on the join order
benchmark [30].
5.1 Setup
We evaluated Bao using the datasets listed in Table 1.
• The IMDb dataset is an augmentation of the Join Or-
der Benchmark [30]: we added thousands of queries
to the original 113 queries, 3 and we vary the query
workload over time by introducing new templates pe-
riodically. The data and schema remain static.
3https://rm.cab/imdb
7

=== PAGE 8 ===
• The Stack dataset is a new dataset introduced by this
work and available publicly. 4 The Stack dataset con-
tains over 18 million questions and answers from 170
diﬀerent StackExchange websites (such as StackOver-
ﬂow.com) between July 2008 and September 2019. We
emulate data drift by initially loading all data up to
September 2018, and then incrementally inserting the
data from September 2018 to September 2019. We
have produced 5000 queries from 25 diﬀerent templates,
and we vary the query workload by introducing new
templates periodically. The schema remains static.
• The Corp dataset is a dashboard analytics workload
executed over one month donated by an anonymous
corporation. The Corp dataset contains 2000 unique
queries issued by analysts. Half way through the month,
the corporation normalized a large fact table, result-
ing in a signiﬁcant schema change. We emulate this
schema change by introducing the normalization after
the execution of the 1000th query (queries after the
1000th expect the new normalized schema). The data
remains static.
For the Stack and IMDb workloads, we vary the workload
over time by introducing new query templates periodically.
We choose the query sequence by randomly assigning each
query template to two of eight groups (every query template
is in exactly two groups). We then build 8 corresponding
groups of query instances, placing one half of all instances
of a query template into the corresponding query template
group. We then randomly order the query instances within
each group, and concatenate the groups together to deter-
mine the order of the queries in the workload. This ensures
that a wide variety of template combinations and shifts are
present. Note that for the Corp workload, the queries are
replayed in the same order as analysts issues them.
Unless otherwise noted, we use a “time series split” strat-
egy for training and testing Bao. Bao is always evaluated
on the next, never-before-seen queryqt+1. When Bao makes
a decision for query qt+1, Bao is only trained on data from
earlier queries. Once Bao makes a decision for query qt+1,
the observed reward for that decision – and only that deci-
sion – is added to Bao’s experience set. This strategy diﬀers
from previous evaluations in [29, 39, 41, 47] because Bao is
never allowed to learn from two diﬀerent decisions about
the same query. 5 Whereas in the prior works mentioned,
a reinforcement learning algorithm could investigate many
possible decisions about the same query, our technique is a
more realistic: once a query is executed using a particular
plan, Bao does not get any information about alternative
plans for the same query.
Bao’s prediction model uses three layers of tree convolu-
tion, with output dimensions (256, 128, 64), followed by a
dynamic pooling [44] layer and two linear layers with output
dimensions (32, 1). We use ReLU activation functions [18]
and layer normalization [10] between each layer. Training is
performed with Adam [26] using a batch size of 16, and is
ran until either 100 epochs elapsed or convergence is reached
(as measured by a decrease in training loss of less than 1%
over 10 epochs).
4https://rm.cab/stack
5In OLAP workloads where nearly-identical queries are fre-
quently repeated (e.g., dashboards), this may be an over-
cautious procedure.
Experiments in Section 5.2 are performed on Google Cloud
Platform, using a N1-4 VM type unless otherwise noted.
NVIDIA Tesla T4 GPUs are attached to VMs when needed.
Cost and time measurements include query optimization,
model training (including GPU time), and query execution.
Costs are reported as billed by Google, and include startup
times and minimum usage thresholds. Experiments in Sec-
tion 5.3 are performed on a virtual machine with 4 CPU
cores and 15 GB of RAM (to match the N1-4 VMs) on pri-
vate server with two Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 6230 CPUs run-
ning at 2.1 Ghz, an NVIDIA Tesla T4 GPU, and 256GB of
system (bare metal) RAM.
We compare Bao against the open source PostgreSQL
database and a commercial database system (ComSys) we
are not permitted to name [55]. Both systems are conﬁg-
ured and tuned according to their respective documentation
and best practices guide. A consultant from the company
that produces the commercial system under test veriﬁed our
conﬁguration with a small performance test. Bao’s chosen
execution plan is always executed on the system being com-
pared against: for example, when comparing against the
PostgreSQL optimizer, Bao’s execution plans are always ex-
ecuted on the PostgreSQL engine.
Unless otherwise noted, we use a family of 48 hint sets,
which each use some subset of the join operators{hash join,
merge join, loop join} and some subset of the scan operators
{sequential, index, index only}. For a detailed description,
see the online appendix [1]. We found that setting the look-
back window size to k = 2000 and retraining every n = 100
queries provided a good tradeoﬀ between GPU time and
query performance.
5.2 Real-world performance
In this section, we evaluate Bao’s performance in a real-
istic warm-cache scenario. In these experiments, we aug-
ment each leaf node vector with caching information as de-
scribed in Section 3.1.1. For caching information, we queried
the commercial system’s internal system tables to determine
what percentage of each ﬁle was cached. We used a similar
strategy for PostgreSQL, using the built-in pg buffercache
extension in the contrib folder.
Cost and performance in the cloud To evaluate Bao’s
potential impact on both query performance and cost, we
begin by evaluating Bao on the Google Cloud Platform [2].
Figure 6a shows the cost (left) and time required (right) to
execute the IMDb workload on various VM sizes when us-
ing Bao and when using the PostgreSQL optimizer on the
PostgreSQL engine. Generally, Bao achieves both a lower
cost and a lower workload latency. For example, on a N1-16
VM, Bao reduces costs by over 50% (from $4.60 to $2.20)
while also reducing the total workload time from over six
hours to just over three hours. The Bao costs do include
the additional fee for renting a GPU: the increased query
performance more than makes up for the cost incurred from
attaching a GPU for training. The diﬀerence in both cost
and performance is most signiﬁcant with larger VM types
(e.g., N1-16 vs. N1-8), suggesting the Bao is better capable
of tuning itself towards the changing hardware than Post-
greSQL. We note that we did re-tune PostgreSQL for each
hardware platform.
Figure 6b shows the same comparison against the com-
mercial database system. Again, Bao is capable of achieving
lower cost and lower workload latency on all four tested ma-
8

=== PAGE 9 ===
N1-2 N1-4 N1-8 N1-16
PostgreSQL
50% 95% 99% 99.5%
Percentile
0
50
100
150Wall time (s)
Bao
PostgreSQL
50% 95% 99% 99.5%
Percentile
0
50
100
150Wall time (s)
Bao
PostgreSQL
50% 95% 99% 99.5%
Percentile
0
50
100
150Wall time (s)
Bao
PostgreSQL
50% 95% 99% 99.5%
Percentile
0
50
100
150Wall time (s)
Bao
PostgreSQLComSys
50% 95% 99% 99.5%
Percentile
0
50
100
150Wall time (s)
Bao
ComSys
50% 95% 99% 99.5%
Percentile
0
50
100
150Wall time (s)
Bao
ComSys
50% 95% 99% 99.5%
Percentile
0
50
100
150Wall time (s)
Bao
ComSys
50% 95% 99% 99.5%
Percentile
0
50
100
150Wall time (s)
Bao
ComSys
Figure 8: Percentile latency for queries, IMDb workload. Each column represents a VM type, from smallest to largest. The
top row compares Bao against the PostgreSQL optimizer on the PostgreSQL engine. The bottom row compares Bao against
a commercial database system on the commercial system’s engine. Measured across the entire (dynamic) IMDb workload.
chine types. However, the diﬀerence is less signiﬁcant, and
the overall costs are much lower, suggesting the commercial
system is a stronger baseline than PostgreSQL. For exam-
ple, while Bao achieved almost a 50% cost and latency re-
duction on the N1-16 machine compared to the PostgreSQL
optimizer, Bao achieves only a 20% reduction compared to
the commercial system. We also note that the improve-
ments from Bao are no longer more signiﬁcant with larger
VM types, indicating that the commercial system is more
capable of adjusting to diﬀerent hardware. Note that these
costs do not include the licensing fees for the commercial
system, which were waived for the purposes of this research.
Changing schema, workload, and data In Figure 7, we
ﬁx the VM type to N1-16 and evaluate Bao on diﬀerent
workloads. Bao shows signiﬁcant improvements over Post-
greSQL, and marginal improvements against the commercial
system. Th