=== PAGE 1 ===
Learned Offline Query Planning via Bayesian Optimization
Jeffrey Tao
University of Pennsylvania
jefftao@seas.upenn.edu
Natalie Maus
University of Pennsylvania
nmaus@seas.upenn.edu
Haydn Jones
University of Pennsylvania
haydnj@seas.upenn.edu
Yimeng Zeng
University of Pennsylvania
yimengz@seas.upenn.edu
Jacob R. Gardner
University of Pennsylvania
jacobrg@seas.upenn.edu
Ryan Marcus
University of Pennsylvania
rcmarcus@seas.upenn.edu
Abstract
Analytics database workloads often contain queries that are exe-
cuted repeatedly. Existing optimization techniques generally prior-
itize keeping optimization cost low, normally well below the time
it takes to execute a single instance of a query. If a given query is
going to be executed thousands of times, could it be worth invest-
ing significantly more optimization time? In contrast to traditional
online query optimizers, we propose an offline query optimizer that
searches a wide variety of plans and incorporates query execution
as a primitive. Our offline query optimizer combines variational
auto-encoders with Bayesian optimization to find optimized plans
for a given query. We compare our technique to the optimal plans
possible with PostgreSQL and recent RL-based systems over several
datasets, and show that our technique finds faster query plans.
1 Introduction
Query optimization is a long-standing problem in the database
community [2, 45, 51]. Recent advancements in learned query opti-
mization (LQO) [7, 8, 38, 57, 65, 69, 95, 98, 99, 104, 106] have shown
significant promise, often delivering 2-10x improvements in query
runtime. However, deploying LQO is complicated due to two main
challenges: (1) query regressions (“my query was fast yesterday,
why is it slow today?”) and (2) the tight integration of machine
learning components into the core query processing pipeline (which
are generally engineered with different levels of reliability in mind).
Despite various efforts to address these challenges [55, 91], most
real-world deployments of LQO (such as at Meta [1], Microsoft [66,
100], and Alibaba [90, 105]) have separated learned query optimiza-
tion two components, an offline component and an online compo-
nent. The offline component tests new query plans and caches those
plans that perform better than the plans produced by the traditional
optimizer. Theonline component then checks this cache for a plan; if
a cached plan is not found, it calls the traditional optimizer instead.
This compromise — spending additional resources offline to find
good query plans for specific queries — solves issues with query
regressions and avoids the need to put ML primitives into the query
processing pipeline, but it is also motivated by the nature of ana-
lytic workloads. In many analytic systems, the majority of compute
resources are spent executing repetitive report generation [54] or
dashboarding queries [74], with some queries being executed hun-
dreds of times per day [93] or hundreds of thousands of times per
year [54]. Recent studies of Amazon Redshift showed that, for the
median database, 60% of all queries executed were repeated queries
(verbatim) [94] and that roughly 10% of all Redshift clusters have
their entire workload consisting of queries that repeated within
time
latency
time
latency
RL seeks to minimize the 
shaded area: the latency 
(negative reward) over time.
BO seeks to minimize the 
best latency (objective) seen 
after a fixed amount of time.
Figure 1: A comparison of reinforcement learning (RL, left)
and Bayesian optimization (BO, right). BO is a better match
for the offline query optimization problem because we do
not care about “regressions” in the offline search phase; we
only care about the quality of the best-discovered plan.
the last day [86]. 1 Substantial repetition means that even a small
improvement in query latency can be amplified many times over,
making it worthwhile to invest additional optimization resources.
We call the goal of these offline components the offline query
optimization problem: to find the best query plan using as few
offline resources (i.e., offline query time) as possible. Unlike tra-
ditional query optimizers, which generally seek to be so fast that
optimization time amortizes to zero compared to execution time,
an offline query optimizer is expected to take many times longer
than a single query execution.
Learned query optimizers using the “offline/online” compromise
are implicitly performing offline query optimization. Current sys-
tems must solve two fundamental problems: first, offline query
optimizers must have a search strategy to decide which plans to
test. Second, offline query optimizers must have a timeout strategy
to deal with query plans that take too long to execute.
Search strategy Existing techniques either use a coarse-grained
search of predefined alternative plans [ 1, 100], or adopt a fine-
grained reinforcement learning procedure [90, 105]. The biggest
drawback of the coarse-grained approach is that the set of plans
explored is limited, and significant improvements may be outside of
the search space. The drawback of the RL approach is more subtle.
Reinforcement learning (RL) is fundamentally the “wrong tool
for the job” of offline query optimization. Specifically, the objective
function of reinforcement learning is poorly aligned with offline
query optimization. Consider the latency of a query over time as
the query is optimized, as depicted on the left side of Figure 1. RL
seeks to minimize the shaded area, representing latency (negative
reward) over time. This corresponds to balancing exploration and
exploitation [79]: the optimizer is penalized each time it chooses
1Some unknown proportion of these verbatim repeats may involve staging tables or
views, for which the underlying query may be changing.
arXiv:2502.05256v1  [cs.DB]  7 Feb 2025
=== PAGE 2 ===
Tao et al.
a bad plan, so the optimizer must frequently choose “lower risk”
plans that lower the area under the curve, but might not be as
informative as “higher risk” plans. This is perfectly aligned with
the goals of online query optimization, however, in the context of
offline query optimization, what we really care about is finding the
best query plan observed during the time-bounded optimization
phase (that is, the minimum of the plotted function, not the area
under the curve), as shown on the right side of Figure 1.
Trouble with timeouts An important, but often overlooked, di-
mension of learned query optimization is query timeouts: since
some query plans are orders of magnitude worse than others [45],
any learned query optimizer (either online or offline) has a non-zero
chance of hitting a poor-performing plan. Current approaches solve
this fundamental dilemma in ad-hoc ways, often by “timing out”
(termination prior to completion) proposed query plans after a fixed
threshold. These timed-out values are problematic because (1) they
represented a large amount of wasted time (a poor query plan was
selected [95]) and (2) no new information was gained (since updat-
ing an RL model with the timed-out value would cause the model to
strictly underestimate the cost of the timed-out query [56]). Thus, a
successful offline query optimizer must have a strategy forselecting
timeout values and for learning from timed-out queries .
Bayesian optimization (BO). We propose an offline query op-
timizer, BayesQO, that closely mirrors recent work in computa-
tional drug discovery [63]: we use a learned encoder and decoder to
translate query plans to and from vectors (called the latent space),
such that similar query plans are mapped to nearby vectors. Then,
off-the-shelf and well-studied Bayesian optimization techniques
manipulate the encoded vectors in the latent space, using query
execution as a reward signal. Existing coarse-grained techniques
that generate a fixed set of plan variants for each query can be used
to initialize the process, ensuring that the best-found plan is at least
as good as the best plan in the initialization set.
We show that off-the-shelf BO techniques [ 75] can be easily
adapted to the offline query optimization objective (that is, finding
the fastest possible plan in the least amount of time). Furthermore,
we show that the framework of Bayesian optimization enables
robust learning from timeouts as well as selecting timeouts on a
learned, plan-by-plan basis. In other words, we can meaningfully
represent “query latency> 𝑥” within the learned model as acensored
observation, and our model’s confidence intervals provide a robust
way of selecting timeouts to maximize information gain. Finally,
we show how cross-query information can be incorporated into
BayesQO by fine-tuning a language model to provide database-
specific initialization points for the BO search process.
In our experiments, we show that offline optimization can yield
10-100x performance improvements over prior learned query opti-
mization for some queries, and we demonstrate that our approach
can find modest improvements for nearly every query in several
benchmarks. Since our system targets repetitive analytic queries,
even modest gains can be significantly amplified in practical set-
tings. Our contributions include:
(1) We formalize the problem of offline query optimization,
(2) We implement BayesQO, an offline query optimizer that applies
Bayesian optimization techniques,
(3) We show how recent developments in Bayesian optimization
that accommodate high-dimensionality and censored observa-
tions can be integrated into BayesQO,
(4) We show how fine-tuning a language model can be used to
incorporate cross-query information into BayesQO,
(5) We show that BayesQO can outperform online learned query
optimization techniques in an offline setting.
2 Related work
Query optimization is a long-standing problem in the databases
community. System R [2] proposed the heuristic query optimization
scheme now used in most production databases [27], consisting of
a cost model, cardinality estimates, and a dynamic programming
search. Conventional query optimizers are designed according to
the “query optimization contract” [6], which expects query opti-
mizers to produce plans quickly (within hundreds of milliseconds,
as the actual execution of the plan might be very quick); this work
proposed that in order to improve query optimizers, we should con-
sider “breaking” this contract in a number of ways, such as allowing
the optimizer to intrusively examine the base data (as opposed to
keeping cheap histograms), spend a long time on optimization, or
even adaptively change the query plan during execution. We be-
lieve our work falls into this “breaking the contract” category. Older
work [52] considered amortizing the cost of searching parts of the
plan space across multiple executions, but did not consider offline
execution. Query reoptimization, perhaps the first “contract breaker, ”
is the task of proactively modifying or recreating a query plan dur-
ing execution, based on information found during execution, with
the overall goal of minimizing total latency [3, 50, 71].
A related concept from the compilers literature is “superopti-
mization” [60], in which a program compiler, which traditionally
follows a similar “contract” as a query optimizer (i.e., fast com-
pilation times), instead uses a large time budget to produce the
best possible sequence of assembly instructions for a given pro-
gram. Our work can be considered a sort of “superoptimization for
query plans”. GenesisDB [34] represents a similar effort, focusing
on developing fast implementations over relational operators, in-
stead of entire query plans (thus GenesisDB is mostly orthogonal
to the work presented here). Kepler [14] uses a genetic algorithm
and exhaustive execution to map the plan space for parameterized
queries, which can be viewed as a type of superoptimization. SlabC-
ity [13] takes an approach similar to traditional superoptimization,
by considering SQL-level semantic rewrites of queries to improve
performance (e.g., query simplification). Finally, DataFarm [ 85]
and HitTheGym [49] investigated how to best produce datasets for
machine learning powered database components, including query
optimizers.
In recent years, the databases community has been increasingly
engaged in applying machine learning techniques to query opti-
mization, including latency prediction [15, 16, 31, 58, 64, 93], car-
dinality estimation [25, 37, 40, 42, 48, 67, 70, 73, 96], and cost mod-
els [78]. Other works have attempted to either augment existing
optimizers with learned components (e.g., [ 8, 9, 47, 55, 91, 98])
or entirely replace query optimizers with reinforcement learning
(e.g., [4, 7, 38, 56, 84, 90, 95, 99, 102–105]). Most of these works are
focused on the online optimization setting: they must complete
=== PAGE 3 ===
Learned Offline Query Planning via Bayesian Optimization
quickly while avoiding performance regressions relative to tradi-
tional heuristic-based optimizers. Most of these works also employ
reinforcement learning, seeking to manage regret from exploring
alternatives instead of exploiting the current known-best plan. In
comparison, we apply Bayesian optimization to the superoptimiza-
tion problem because we are principally concerned with finding
the query plan with the best possible latency, and ignore subopti-
mal plans. In the superoptimization setting, bad plans are only bad
insofar as executing them until the timeout consumes part of the
optimization time budget.
Bayesian optimization is not the only sample-efficient learning
technique. For example, NeuroCARD [96] learns join distributions
efficiently by uniformly sampling tuples from the full outer join of
all tables in a schema. Reiner et al. [73] show how domain knowl-
edge can be incorporated into learned models to improve sample
efficiency via geometric deep learning. LlamaTune [39] uses data-
base documentation to accelerate DBMS knob-tuning.
While our plan encoding was inspired by work in molecular
dynamics (i.e, SELFIES [43] strings as used by Maus et al. [62]), a
representation with similar goals for query plans was presented by
Reiner et al. [73]. Our approaches mainly differ in what we are try-
ing to represent: as our format only seeks to encode join orderings,
it does not encode predicates. Furthermore, while Reiner et al. use
invariances to give joins with the same cardinality the same repre-
sentation, our encoding format may have multiple representations
for the same join ordering. Further motivation for this design choice
is given in Section 4.1. Other works have also looked at non-string
representations of queries based on graphs [ 73], trees [ 56], and
recurrences [80], typically by using neural network architectures
which model these structures.
The random search heuristic we presented in Section 5 can be
considered a modified version of QuickPick [88]. Instead of sam-
pling random query plans and then using a cost model to evaluate
their quality, we simply evaluate the quality of the random plans by
actually executing them. Such a suggestion would seem ludicrous in
the original context of [88], but for offline optimization, executing
terrible query plans is not off the table, if it eventually leads to a
better plan!
Since Bayesian optimization is a relatively old technique, it may
be reasonable to ask “why now?” Recent innovations in the ma-
chine learning community have made it practical to apply Bayesian
optimization to structured (i.e. non-continuous) inputs with high
dimensionality [20, 22, 63], which was previously impossible. The
key innovation that enabled this advancement was attention trans-
former models [87], which allowed sequences to be efficiently and
accurately mapped into vector spaces. In the databases literature,
Bayesian optimization has been most frequently applied to tuning
configuration knobs [5, 44, 101]. To our knowledge, this is the first
work to apply BO directly to the optimization of individual queries.
Perhaps most similar to this work is LimeQO [97], a system that
uses offline query execution to find the best query hint for each
query in a workload. LimeQO can be viewed as a practical way of
finding an optimal Bao [55] model for a given workload. LimeQO is
arguably much simpler than the present work, requiring only linear
methods (e.g., no VAE or Bayesian optimization). However, LimeQO
only considers a finite set of query hints to apply to each query in
a workload, whereas we fully construct query plans. As a result,
the present work can potentially find better plans. Additionally,
LimeQO focuses on optimizing an entire workload of queries at once
(i.e., considering which queries are best to explore next), whereas
we focus on optimizing only a single user-specified queries.
3 System model & problem definition
We define the offline optimization problem for database query
planning and show an approach to offline optimization based on
Bayesian optimization. We implement this approach in BayesQO.
Challenges An obvious naive strategy to perform offline optimiza-
tion is to exhaustively enumerate the space of all possible query
plans. This is obviously computationally intractable even for rela-
tively simple queries on few tables: the number of join orderings
alone grows super-factorially with the number of joined tables: for
a query joining 𝑛 tables, considering only binary joins and ignoring
physical operator selection, there are 𝑛! ·𝐶𝑛 = 2𝑛!
𝑛! distinct join
orderings, where 𝐶𝑛 is the 𝑛-th Catalan number [68].
A refinement of this strategy might be to consider query plan-
ning with “perfect cardinalities, ” since cardinality estimates are
often hypothesized to be the main culprit for poor query plan per-
formance [45]. Exhaustively computing cardinality estimates for
even a simple query can take months [67], and adaptively measur-
ing only the cardinality estimates used by the query planner leads
to the infamous “fleeing from knowledge” problem in which the
optimizer repeatedly picks poor query plans due to underestimation
from the independence assumption [59].
Furthermore, the plan space contains numerous bad plans which
on their own are intolerable to execute to completion as they are
many orders of magnitude slower than the optimal. Thus, an offline
optimization method must efficiently explore the space of query
plans while avoiding executing these bad plans to completion.
It is also crucial that the optimization process use information
gained from executing candidate plans to inform its exploration. A
necessary property of an offline optimization method is that it can
be run for longer in order to obtain better results.
System model Figure 2 depicts the architecture of BayesQO. First,
❶ a user identifies a query 𝑄 that they wish to optimize offline.
BayesQO will then begin searching for a fast plan for 𝑄. To do
so, BayesQO uses a Bayesian optimization loop: ❷ an initialization
strategy (discussed in section 4.4) is used to produce a set of plans
❸ the plans are translated into strings (discussed in section 4.1)
and embedded into a vector space using a learned model, ❹ the
embedded plans and their observed execution latencies are used to
initialize the surrogate model, ❺ an acquisition function (discussed
in section 4.3) is used to select a point in the latent space, and
then ❻ the latent space vector is decoded back to a query plan.
❼ This plan is then given a timeout value 𝑇 𝑂(𝑃), and executed
against a read-only snapshot of the database. The query either
executes successfully with latency 𝐿(𝑃) < 𝑇 𝑂(𝑃), or times out.
❽ the Bayesian optimization algorithm uses the observed latency
of the new query plan to improve its understanding of the query
space. Then, the process repeats steps ❺ → ❽ until a time budget
is exhausted or the user is satisfied with the achieved latency. ❾
Finally, the best seen plan goes into a cache.
When the query is being executed online, ❶ the user submits a
runtime query to the system. ❷ If the plan is present in the cache
=== PAGE 4 ===
Tao et al.
S urr o ga t e M odel
O bserv a tions
U nc ertain ty
Q uery  plan la t en t spac e
Q uery  La t ency
E nc oder D ec oder
P lan La t en t S pac e P lan S tringP lan S tring
V AE
B a y es QO
I nitializ er
SELECT min(...)
  FROM title t, 
       movie_companies mc,
       ...
 WHERE mc.movie_id = t.id
       ...
Q uery  o f  in t er est
R ead S napsho t
DB
1 S ubmit
2 I nitial O bserv a tions
6 D ec ode3 E nc ode
4 I nitializ e M odel 5 A c quir e
7 Ex ecut e
8 U pda t e M odel
5 8
P lan v ect or , T imeoutP lan v ect or , O bserv a tion
P lan v ect or , O bserv a tion
P lan Cache
9 B est P lan
1 Ch ec k  C ac h e 2 Ex ecut e
3 R eop timiz e ?
L oop
un til budg e t
Figure 2: BayesQO workflow
because it was optimized offline, the cached plan is used. Otherwise,
the DBMS’ optimizer is used.❸ Looking at the runtime statistics
of the executed plan, BayesQO decides whether the query should
be re-optimized.
Problem definition Our goal is to find a query plan 𝑃 with low
latency for a query 𝑄 using as few additional resources as possible
(i.e., as quickly as possible).2 Unlike traditional query optimizers,
BayesQO will continuously test new query plans until terminated
(either by a time budget or directly by the user). We denote the
sequence of queries produced by BayesQO at a given time 𝑡 as
𝑆𝑡 = 𝑃1, 𝑃2, . . . , 𝑃𝑛. Let I𝑖 be an indicator such that when I𝑖 = 0, the
plan 𝑃𝑖 completed successfully, and when I𝑖 = 1, the plan 𝑃𝑖 timed
out. Thus, the cost a sequence 𝑆𝑡 is denoted as:
𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 (𝑆𝑡 ) =
∑︁
𝑖
I𝑖 × 𝑇 𝑂(𝑃𝑖 ) + ( 1 + −I𝑖 ) × 𝐿(𝑃𝑖 )
... and the best latency achieved within 𝑆𝑡 is denoted as:
𝐿𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑦 (𝑆𝑡 ) = min
𝑖
(
𝐿(𝑃𝑖 ) if I𝑖 = 0
∞ if I𝑖 = 1
Our goal is minimize latency while staying within a user-specified
cost budget 𝐵:
min
𝑆𝑡
𝐿𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑦 (𝑆𝑡 )
subject to 𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 (𝑆𝑡 ) < 𝐵
(1)
Discussion Traditional and previous learned query optimizers
solve this problem for (very small) budgets 𝐵 (e.g. for Neo [ 56],
𝐵 < 500𝑚𝑠). Here we consider 𝐵 large enough to actually test the
query plan. Prior optimizers are designed to have the optimization
time amortized out compared to execution, our approach assumes
optimization time is many times higher than the query latency.
2Note that the constraint on time is required to make the problem non-trivial: if we
have infinite computational resources, we can simply test every possible query plan
and pick the fastest one.
Assumptions Our system model assumes the following about the
DBMS and workload:
(1) There is a default query optimizer that produces reasonable but
not globally optimal query plans for any given query.
(2) Queries can be executed against read snapshots of the database.
(3) The execution engine can accept physical plans/hints that spec-
ify join orders and physical join operators.
(4) Joins within queries are PK-FK equijoins. 3
Why a read snapshot? BayesQO needs to execute many plans
over the course of optimizing a query, some of which may be bad
plans with very large intermediate results. So as not to disrupt the
database’s currently-running workload, we assume the ability to
execute queries against read snapshots.
Example: a trivial offline optimizer The easiest way to imple-
ment an offline optimizer in our framework is with random plan
search, similar to Quickpick [88] but ignoring cost estimates. Given
a query 𝑄, first measure the latency of the query plan 𝑃𝑑 produced
by the default query optimizer 𝐿(𝑃𝑑 ). Then, select a query plan 𝑃1
for 𝑄 at random, and execute it with timeout equal to the latency
of the default plan 𝑇 𝑂(𝑃1) = 𝐿(𝑃𝑑 ). Ignore the feedback, and con-
tinue executing random plans up to the budget B. While the odds of
finding a better plan than 𝑃𝑑 are poor, note that you never exceed
the budget B and your final plan is always at least as good as the
default optimizer. We experimentally evaluate this simple baseline
in Section 5.
Cross-query learning A hidden benefit to BayesQO is that each
time a query is optimized, a large number of query plans are ex-
ecuted. These execution traces can be used as training data for
cross-query models. BayesQO does this by using past execution
traces to fine-tune an LLM to conditionally generate a query plan
string (described in Section 4.1) for a given query. While this LLM
obviously will not always produce a high-quality query plan, we
show experimentally that these LLM-generated plans are reason-
able starting points for future optimizations. Thus, BayesQO creates
a “virtuous cycle:” each time a query is optimized, additional train-
ing data is collected. That training data can be used to fine-tune
an LLM. The LLM can then generate good initialization points for
optimizing the next query, and so on. We describe our technique
for cross-query learning in Section 4.4.
4 Bayesian Optimization for Query Plans
Given our goal to perform offline optimization of queries while
minimizing the cost of executing extra queries against the data-
base, and given that we do not know how to efficiently explore the
space of possible query plans, Bayesian optimization is a promis-
ing approach. Bayesian optimization (BO) enables optimization of
expensive-to-evaluate, black-box functions while requiring rela-
tively few evaluations of the expensive function. However, Bayesian
optimization techniques operate over continuous, real-valued do-
mains, whereas query plans are discrete tree structures.
Prior work on Latent Space Bayesian Optimization (LSBO) has
allowed Bayesian optimization to be applied over other discrete,
3This is mostly a constraint of our current implementation; future work could straight-
forwardly extend this technique to support non-key or non-equijoin queries, since
our core technique only needs to know which tables are involved in which joins.
=== PAGE 5 ===
Learned Offline Query Planning via Bayesian Optimization
combinatorial spaces by using a deep autoencoder model (DAE) to
transform a discrete, structured search space X into a continuous,
numerical one Z [11, 19, 26, 28, 36, 63, 83]. For example, Maus
et al. [63] applied LSBO to problems in drug discovery using a DAE
trained on string representations of molecules. Inspired by this
work, we define a string encoding format for query plans that can
represent all possible query plans and in which each string decodes
unambiguously to a particular query plan (Section 4.1). We train a
variational autoencoder (VAE) on strings of this format using plans
derived from a traditional query optimizer (Section 4.2). We per-
form BO in the latent space of this VAE (Section 4.3), making novel
contributions in the selection of timeouts (Section 4.3.1). Finally,
we discuss different strategies for initializing the local BO process,
as the quality of initialization points impacts BO performance (Sec-
tion 4.4).
4.1 Query Plan String Format
Our first step towards optimizing query plans with Bayesian op-
timization is to build a string language for query plans that we
encode and decode into a vector space. We first explain the desired
properties of this string language. Then, we explain the string lan-
guage we designed to have these properties. While we believe our
string languages makes some good tradeoffs, in theory any string
language with the desired properties could be equally effective.
Desiderata for string representations. We identify two impor-
tant attributes of our string language from prior work on molecular
optimization. Maus et al. [63] identify two essential properties that
are key to success of a string language for Bayesian optimization (in
the case of [63], the string language is called SELFIES [43] and de-
scribes molecules). We translate those design constraints from the
domain of [63] to query optimization, and adopt these properties
as requirements for our query plan language:
(1) Completeness. Any valid query plan in 𝑋 must be repre-
sentable as a string using the language. If this is not true, high-
quality plans that are not representable will not be discoverable
by our optimization algorithm.
(2) Decoding validity. Any sequence of characters in the lan-
guage must correspond to a unique and valid query plan. If
latent codes of the DAE decode to invalid query plans, opti-
mization would need to be done under additional feasibility
constraints, which adds unnecessary complexity to the opti-
mization problem. Validity was a primary goal of the models
in both Jin et al. [35] and Maus et al. [61].
The ideal string representation would also be injective, meaning
that each unique string maps to a unique plan [73]. We were unable
to find a string representation with all three of these properties, so
we settle for a complete representation with decoding validity that
is not injective (the same plan might be represented by multiple
strings). Taking this tradeoff is motivated by prior work: Maus et
al. [62] showed that a string representation with only completeness
and decoding validity (SELFIES [ 43]) outperformed an injective
representation with completeness (SMILES [89]). We leave the in-
vestigation of alternative string representations to future work.
String language for query plans We design an encoding format
for binary-tree-structured query plan defining join orders and oper-
ators (henceforth, a “join tree”). The join tree does not encode other
aspects of the query such as selections, join and filter predictes, and
aggregations. When the join tree is decoded to executable SQL, we
translate the join tree to a hint string and prepend it to the original
SQL text which contains these aspects of the query. We observe
that a join tree can be unambiguously reconstructed by knowing
for each non-leaf node the left and right subtree that compose it,
and that valid trees have left and right subtrees that are disjoint;
we simply need an unambiguous way to identify these subtrees.
In our encoding format, each join subtree is expressed as a 3
symbol sequence (left, right, operator). Each physical join operator
(ℎash, 𝑚erge, 𝑛ested loops) is given a unique symbol. The fully
specified query plan is simply the concatenation of these sequences.
The leaves of a join tree are always the tables being joined, so we
define a unique symbol for each base table in the schema. However,
we cannot define symbols for each possible join subtree, as doing
so would be tantamount to defining a unique symbol for every
possible query plan. Instead, we observe that after a table symbol
is used once to specify a join subtree, it will never be used again, as
any table will only ever appear as a leaf once. The same is true for
each join subtree after it is specified to be the child of some larger
subtree. As such, to the right of a particular join subtree sequence,
the symbols composing the join instead refer to the larger subtree.
For multiple occurrences of the same table under different aliases
within the same query, we rename such aliases to be numbered
(e.g. movies1, movies2, ...), and we define a unique symbol in our
language per table-number pair. This does require choosing a maxi-
mum number of possible aliases of a single table; in our experiments
we select the maximum occurrences of a particular table within the
benchmark queries.
The leftmost occurrence of a table symbol in a plan string always
references the base table itself, but subsequent occurrences repre-
sent the largest subtree that the table is part of. For example, in a join
between three tables𝐴, 𝐵, and𝐶, (𝐴 ⊲ ⊳hash (𝐵 ⊲ ⊳merge 𝐶)), the valid
encoding strings are (𝐵, 𝐶, ⊲ ⊳m, 𝐴, 𝐵,⊲ ⊳h) and (𝐵, 𝐶, ⊲ ⊳m, 𝐴, 𝐶,⊲ ⊳h).
To fulfill our second requirement, decoding validity, we use a
simple trick. We maintain state about the partially-specified join
tree as we decode the string from left to right. If the decoder en-
counters a symbol that is not syntactically valid (e.g. a table in place
of a join operator) or semantically valid (e.g. a table that is not part
of the join), it deterministically resolves it to a symbol that is valid
by constructing a list of all valid symbols and using the invalid
symbol’s integer value as an index into the list.
We note that the choice of replacement symbol is arbitrary, but
this scheme for ensuring decoding validity is preferable to more
obvious ideas such as simply refusing and resampling when en-
countering invalid strings or decoding them to some default plan.
Bayesian optimization will be performed over a vector space that
decodes to potential plan strings. Rejecting strings would prevent
the surrogate model learning about vast regions of the plan space.
Decoding all invalid strings to some default plan would make vast
regions of the space undifferentiated in performance. Our technique
ensures that all strings decode to valid plans, that similar invalid
strings are mapped to somewhat different valid query plans, and
that these decodings are a valid function of the input string.
=== PAGE 6 ===
Tao et al.
Limitations Our language does not represent subqueries and CTEs.
When processing queries that contain such structures, they are left
untouched, so the decoded query plan hint will not contain any
reference to them or to tables only occurring within them.
4.2 Encoding & Decoding Query Plans
While BO can be applied to various search spaces, it is most straight-
forward in a continuous, real-valued domain. This presents a chal-
lenge when optimizing query plans, which are inherently discrete
tree structures. To address this, we construct a mapping between
query plans and points in a continuous domain. Having defined our
string representation in Section 4.1, we train a deep autoencoder
(DAE) model on these encoded strings. This process generates a
latent space – a continuous, real-valued domain that serves as a
proxy for the discrete space of query plans, enabling application
of BO techniques. Intuitively, the goal of the DAE is to construct
a latent space in which similar query plans are mapped to similar
vectors. This way, a search routine that finds a particularly good
plan can look at the “neighbors” of that plan in the latent space for
similar plans. The notions of “similar” and “neighbors” are both
highly approximate: no actual neighborhoods or similarity scores
are computed, but instead this property is implicitly created when
training the DAE.
A DAE consists of an encoder Φ : 𝑋 → 𝑍 that maps from an
input space𝑋 to a latent space𝑍 (sometimes called a bottleneck [76],
as it is often lower dimensional than 𝑋 in order to force a degree of
compression) and a decoder Γ : 𝑍 → 𝑋 that maps from the latent
space back to the input space. We use a type of DAE known as a
variational autoencoder (VAE) [41], in which the encoder produces
a distribution over latent points Φ(𝑍 |𝑋 ), and the decoder produces
a distribution over 𝑋 given 𝑍, Γ(𝑋 |𝑍 ). The model is trained by
maximizing the evidence lower bound (ELBO):
EΦ(𝑍 |𝑋 ) [log Γ(𝑋 |𝑍 ) − KL(Φ(𝑍 |𝑋 )|| 𝑝 (𝑍 )]
In training such a DAE, we construct a mapping Γ : 𝑍 → 𝑋 that
can produce string-encoded query plans given points in the latent
space. The VAE regularization (the KL term, representing relative
entropy) makes the search space smooth, facilitating more effective
optimization. This is precisely what we need in order to perform
BO: the surrogate model is defined over the latent space, and we
evaluate the black-box function 𝑓 for points in the latent space by
decoding the point to a string query plan through the DAE and
executing them against the real database.
Training data In order to train the DAE, we compute a large set
of encoded query plans ( ∼1 million) from the database schema.
Importantly, this process does not require any query execution, and
can be done exclusively with only metadata from the DBMS. The
idea is to create a suitably diverse set of “reasonable” query plans
so that the DAE can learn a smooth probability distribution of the
space of query plans. By “reasonable” here, we do not mean that
these plans must all be optimal, just that they must be somewhat
representative of the family of optimal query plans—the purpose
of this is to create a space of plans in which points that are close to
each other have similar performance characteristics. However, the
space still contains points for all possible query plans.
To generate this set of plans, we sample random PK-FK equijoin
queries from the schema by constructing the “alias- 𝑘 reference
graph” which contains 𝑘 nodes corresponding to each table and
edges corresponding to all PK-FK references between tables. We
choose 𝑘 equal to the highest number of aliases of the same table
used in any query in the workload. From this alias- 𝑘 reference
graph, we sample queries by selecting random connected subgraphs
with varying numbers of vertices. Given a particular subgraph,
we produce a query joining all table aliases with join predicates
corresponding to all present edges.
For each sampled query, we plan the query using the existing
default query optimizer (e.g. PostgreSQL), encode the plan in our
string encoding format, and add it to the VAE training set. In order
to expand the diversity of plans used to train the VAE, we addition-
ally produce encoded plans using hints [72] to the default query
optimizer (e.g. disable nested loops, disable sequential scans).
Our training data generation process makes two key design
choices: (1) sampling random queries from the database schema,
and (2) generating query plans with the database’s default optimizer.
The first decision ensures that we have coverage for a wide variety
of input queries. Our goal is to train the DAE once per schema, and
then reuse the DAE for every query over the schema. The second
decision ensures that the query plans we get are somewhat reason-
able. For example, the underlying database optimizer is unlikely
to pick a plan full of cross joins, and is likely to take advantage of
index structures if applicable.
4.3 Background on Bayesian Optimization
Given a query plan language and a trained DAE to translate query
plan strings into vectors in a latent space (and back), we can now
optimize queries inside of the latent space using Bayesian optimiza-
tion (BO). Intuitively, BO in our application works by learning the
relationship between the DAE’s latent space and actual query plan
latency. BO learns this relationship by repeatedly testing points
sampled from the latent space. If the BO algorithm can get a good
estimation of the relationship between the latent space and query
latency, then good plans can be found. This section gives important
background on the BO technique we use in this paper. Then, in
Section 4.3.1, we explain some of the small changes we made to
traditional algorithms to address query optimization specifically.
Bayesian Optimization This section provides a brief overview of
Bayesian Optimization (BO). For readers unfamiliar with BO, we
recommend the comprehensive book by Garnett [24]. Our method-
ology builds upon the approach developed by Eriksson et al. [21],
with specific novel modifications tailored for optimizing query
plans and execution latency in a DBMS.
Bayesian Optimization is a method for optimizing black-box
functions that are expensive to evaluate, aiming forsample efficiency.
Given an input space X and an unknown objective function 𝑓 :
X → R, BO seeks to find an input 𝑥 ∗ ∈ X that minimizes 𝑓 (𝑥) in
as few evaluations of 𝑓 as possible. This is particularly useful when
each evaluation of 𝑓 (𝑥) is costly—for example, when 𝑓 (𝑥) involves
executing a query plan in a DBMS to measure its runtime.
BO operates by constructing a probabilistic surrogate model of
the objective function, which is iteratively refined as new data is
acquired. The general optimization procedure follows these steps:
=== PAGE 7 ===
Learned Offline Query Planning via Bayesian Optimization
(1) Initialization: Build a surrogate model of the objective func-
tion 𝑓 .
(2) Acquisition Function Optimization: Use an acquisition func-
tion to select the next point 𝑥next to evaluate, balancing explo-
ration and exploitation.
(3) Evaluation: Compute the true function value 𝑓 (𝑥next) by exe-
cuting the query plan corresponding to 𝑥next.
(4) Model Update : Update the surrogate model with the new
observation (𝑥next, 𝑓 (𝑥next)), and repeat steps 2–4.
To efficiently navigate the search space, BO leverages the sur-
rogate model along with the acquisition function to select promis-
ing candidate plans while minimizing the number of expensive
evaluations. In this work, we use Thompson Sampling [81] as the
acquisition function.
Local BO Standard BO methods can struggle with high-dimensional
or discrete optimization problems, such as those encountered in
query plan optimization, due to the curse of dimensionality and
the combinatorial explosion of the search space. To address this,
we incorporate methods from the local BO literature, specifically
TuRBO [21]. TuRBO maintains a hyper-rectangular “trust region”
within the input space, which constrains the region from which
points are sampled. By dynamically adjusting the size and location
of these trust region based on the the optimization success / fail-
ure, TuRBO can balance global exploration with local exploitation,
allowing for efficient optimization in high-dimensional spaces. 4
Right-Censored Observations During typical Bayesian optimiza-
tion, when we make an observation at a point x, we obtain an asso-
ciated objective value 𝑓 (x) = 𝑦. For a right-censored observation,
when we observe at the point x, we instead only learn that 𝑦 was
greater than some threshold 𝜏. In our application, right-censored
observations represent query timeouts: If a query x is observed to
execute for 𝜏 seconds before timing out, then we know that the
true latency of 𝑞 is at least 𝜏: 𝑓 (x) ≥ 𝜏.
In the query optimization setting, using right-censored observa-
tions is particularly important. Obtaining true values for arbitrary
plans in the space of possible plans can be infeasible, as bad plans
may take days or even weeks. Thus, it is more efficient if we can
time out plans that perform poorly and update the surrogate model
with knowledge that the running time of 𝑥 is “at least as bad as
𝑦”. Intuitively, for regions of𝑋 that contain truly awful plans, for
the purposes of finding optimal plans, it is not necessary to know
exactly how bad a particular plan is—it suffices to know that plans
like it should be avoided.
BO in the presence of censored observations was first explored
by Hutter et al. [33], where an EM-like algorithm was used to im-
pute the value of censored responses. They applied this method to
algorithm configuration, terminating any runs that exceeded a con-
stant factor of the shortest running time observed so far. Building
on this, Eggensperger et al. [ 17] trained a neural network surro-
gate on a likelihood based on the Tobit model to directly model
4Though called “local BO”, this is aglobal optimization process that can produce results
significantly different from the initialization points. Local BO methods are the most
competitive methods in high-dimensional spaces, as established in Eriksson et al. [21].
right-censored observations:
𝑝 (y|f) = 𝜙 (z)1−I (1 − Φ(z)) I
z = f − 𝜇
𝜎2
𝐼 =
(
0, if y is uncensored
1, if y is censored
(2)
where 𝜙 and Φ denote the Gaussian density and cumulative density
function respectively. In [17], timeout thresholds were chosen as a
fixed percentile of existing observations.
Approximate Gaussian Processes Because the space of query
plans is large, we anticipate needing to test a large number of query
plans. As a result, we must select a surrogate model that (1) allows
for probabilistic inference, that is, gives a probability distribution
at each point instead of a simple point estimate, and (2) can scale
to a large number of observations. Thus, we select an approximate
Gaussian Process (GP) model.
Approximate GP models, such as the popular Scalable Varia-
tional Gaussian Process (SVGP) [30], use inducing point methods
in combination with variational inference to allow approximate GP
inference on large data sets [29, 82]. The standard evidence lower
bound (ELBO) on the log-likelihood used to train a SVGP model is
the following:
log 𝑝 (y) ≥ E𝑞 (f ) [log 𝑝 (y | f)] − KL(𝑞(u) || 𝑝 (u)) (3)
4.3.1 Bayesian Optimization with Censored Observations. While
previous work on Bayesian optimization with censored observa-
tions (censored BO) did not use approximate SVGP [30] models, we
contribute a straightforward extension of SVGP [30] models to the
censored BO setting. Starting from Equation (3) and using the Tobit
likelihood given in Equation (2), we derive the new ELBO:
log 𝑝 (y) ≥ E𝑞 (f ) [log 𝑝 (y | f)] − KL(𝑞(u) || 𝑝 (u))
= E𝑞 (f ) [log 𝜙 (Z)1−I (1 − Φ(Z)) I] − KL(𝑞(u) || 𝑝 (u))
= E𝑞 (f ) [log 𝜙 (Z)1−I + log(1 − Φ(Z)) I] − KL(𝑞(u) || 𝑝 (u))
= E𝑞 (f ) [log 𝜙 (Zu)] + E𝑞 (f ) [log(1 − Φ(Zc))] − KL(𝑞(u) || 𝑝 (u))
Here, Z𝑢 correspond to f −𝜇
𝜎 2 values for uncensored observations,
and Z𝑐 correspond to censored observations. The first term can
be computed analytically as in standard SVGP models. The second
term, E𝑞 (f ) [log(1 − Φ(Zc))] , can be computed using one dimen-
sional numerical techniques like Gauss-Hermite quadrature.
During optimization, we select a threshold 𝜏 for each executed
query plan x, and cut off execution once the running time exceeds
𝜏. This results in right-censored observations. Selecting the timeout
for any given observation is crucial: selecting too low of a timeout
deprives BO of important knowledge about the space of plans,
whereas selecting too high of a timeout wastes time executing bad
plans. Previous work in BO uses a constant multiplier over the
best observation seen so far [ 32], or a fixed percentile across all
observations [18]. Balsa [95] also uses a fixed multiplier in order to
bound the impact of executing bad plans. We use an uncertainty-
based method for selecting timeouts that, compared to prior work,
ensures that the surrogate model will be sufficiently confident that
a particular point is suboptimal before timing out.
=== PAGE 8 ===
Tao et al.
Before evaluating a new candidate query plan 𝑥𝑡 during step
𝑡 of optimization, we dynamically set a new timeout threshold
𝜏𝑡 . We select thresholds so that, after conditioning on the right-
censored observation (x𝑡 , 𝜏𝑡 ), we are confident that the best query
plan observed so far, x∗
𝑡 , is still a better design than the candidate
plan x𝑡 . Because we do not want to waste additional running time
evaluating 𝑓 (x𝑡 ), we ideally want the smallest such 𝜏𝑡 .
Selecting 𝜏𝑡 . The above discussion leads to the following opti-
mization problem, where we find the smallest threshold 𝜏 so that
our incumbent is confidently better than x𝑡 after conditioning on
(x𝑡 , 𝜏):
𝜏 ∗
𝑡 = arg min𝜏
s.t. 𝑦∗
𝑡 ≤ 𝜇′
𝑡 (𝜏) − 𝜅𝜎 ′
𝑡 (𝜏)
On its surface, this optimization problem is challenging, as eval-
uating our constraint for a given 𝜏 involves updating the Gaussian
process surrogate model with that value 𝜏 as the observed time-
out. This is similar to other acquisition functions in the Bayesian
optimization literature that use fantasization to do lookahead, e.g.,
knowledge gradient [23].
Because we use variational GPs, there are several inexpensive
strategies that we can use to evaluate the constraint. For example,
Maddox et al. [53] recently proposed an efficient routine for online
updating sparse variational GPs, both with conjugate and non-
conjugate likelihoods. Alternatively, a few additional iterations of
SGD can be used to update the model in a less sophisticated way.
Finally, we note that the value of𝜇′
𝑡 (𝜏) −𝜅𝜎 ′
𝑡 (𝜏) should generally
be monotonic in𝜏—fantasizing that x𝑡 cut off with a larger threshold
should strictly increase the gap between our belief about 𝑦𝑡 and 𝑦∗
𝑡 .
Therefore, given a routine to cheaply evaluate the constraint, the
constrained minimization problem over 𝜏 can be solved e.g. with
binary search.
4.4 Initialization Strategies
The initial step of BO for a given query typically involves selecting
points within the latent space using the acquisition function. As
the surrogate is initialized with a random prior, this amounts to
selecting random points within the latent space. Theoretically, given
sufficient time for BO execution, this approach would yield optimal
results. However, to improve the practicality of BO within high
dimensional spaces, it is helpful to initialize the process with a
small number of precomputed (𝑥, 𝑓 (𝑥)) pairs representing high-
quality plans. We explore multiple methods of generating these
initialization points.
Hinted plans (Bao) We can leverage an existing traditional query
optimizer that accepts hints, such as PostgreSQL, to generate the
initialization points. We exhaust all of the combinations of join
and scan hints (as in the hint sets used by Marcus et al. ’s Bao [55]
optimizer) to produce 49 initialization points for each query. These
49 initialization points are guaranteed to contain the best plan that
could have possibly been chosen by Bao. We note that it is not
important which of the queries in the initialization set is optimal,
merely that the initialization set contains some queries that rep-
resent a promising starting point for optimization. Thus, it is not
necessary to “prune” hint sets from Bao, as is recommended in [55].
The default optimizer plan A simpler strategy would be to gen-
erate a single optimization point by using the DBMS’ underlying
optimizer. This approach has the advantage of simplicity, since the
underlying DBMS almost surely has an optimizer. Unfortunately,
we found that this approach does not work well in practice, mostly
because initializing BO with a single initialization point seems to
be suboptimal [63].
LLM Inspired by previous work demonstrating the effectiveness of
large language models (LLMs) in optimizing program runtimes [77],
we explore the use of fine-tuned LLMs for generating initialization
points. We collected trajectories from 606 BayesQO runs, select-
ing the top-1 and top-5 query plans for each query to construct a
fine-tuning dataset. Using this dataset, we fine-tuned GPT4o-mini
for one epoch. For each new query, we use the fine-tuned model to
sample 50 initialization points. This approach leverages the model’s
ability to learn patterns from previous optimization runs, potentially
producing high-quality plans that outperform those generated by
traditional query optimizers. Our evaluation (section 5.6) demon-
strates that this LLM-based strategy can often produce the best
query plan among all initialization strategies considered here.
Extensibility BayesQO simply admits sets of initialization pairs
(𝑥, 𝑓 (𝑥)), so any strategy can be used to generate these pairs. As
such, our approach can incorporate future improvements in tradi-
tional or learned query optimization techniques.
4.5 Random plans
Though not related to BO, we implement random plan search, which
can be thought of as a completely exploration-based algorithm. The
intuition behind this method is that joins are commutative but that
cross-joins are generally bad for performance. This strategy samples
random plans from the space of all plans that do not contain any
cross joins.
Given a particular query over a set of table aliases, we construct
the subgraph of the schema’s alias-𝑘 reference graph containing
only the table aliases referenced in the query. From this query graph,
we can construct a random join tree by constructing a spanning
tree. Whenever an edge is added to the spanning tree, we add the
join between the two newly connected components to the join tree.
Physical join operators are selected uniformly randomly.
One potential benefit of utilizing this strategy is that its viability
implies that it may be possible to perform offline optimization in the
absence of a traditional query optimizer. As we show in Section 5,
this strategy can be used on its own to perform offline optimization.
5 Experiments
We sought to answer the following research questions about BayesQO:
RQ1. How effectively does BayesQO reduce query latency for
a workload given a certain time budget? (Section 5.2, Sec-
tion 5.3)
RQ2. How important are our modifications to Bayesian optimiza-
tion to the performance of BayesQO? (Section 5.4)
RQ3. How robust are plans generated by BayesQO to data drift?
Can previously optimized plans help jump-start reoptimiza-
tion? (Section 5.5)
=== PAGE 9 ===
Learned Offline Query Planning via Bayesian Optimization
Name Size on Disk Queries Median joins per query
JOB 8GB 113 7
CEB 8GB 234 10
Stack 64GB 200 6
DSB 89GB 90 5
Table 1: Characteristics for the four evaluation workloads.
RQ4. Can we train an LLM from offline optimization results to
generalize to unseen queries? (Section 5.6)
5.1 Setup
We evaluate BayesQO over four sets of queries:
(1) JOB: The entire Join Order Benchmark (introduced by Leis et
al. [46]), which consists of 113 queries over the IMDB dataset.
(2) CEB: A subset of the Cardinality Estimation Benchmark (in-
troduced by Negi et al. in “Flow-Loss” [ 67]), which consists
of ∼ 3000 queries divided across 16 query templates over the
IMDB dataset. We select the top 100 and bottom 100 queries by
improvement of the optimal hint set vs. the PostgreSQL default
plan and the 100 queries with longest-running PostgreSQL de-
fault plans. There is some overlap between these categories,
resulting in 234 total queries representing 13 templates.
(3) Stack: A subset of the StackOverflow benchmark (introduced
by Marcus et al. in “Bao” [55]), which consists of ∼ 6000 queries
divided across 16 query templates. We selected the longest-
running queries from each template in equal proportion (ex-
cluding templates consisting entirely of queries that took less
than 1 second), producing a list of 200 queries.
(4) DSB: 3 generated queries from each of 30 templates, based
on TPC-DS but enhanced with more complex data distribu-
tions and query templates (introduced by Ding et al. [12]). We
use generated queries from the “agg” and “spj” template sets.
Following Wu et al. [92], we use a scale factor of 50.
Workload characteristics are summarized in Table 1.
The offline query planning setting has not received much at-
tention in the query optimization literature. To our knowledge,
this work is one of the first to demonstrate an offline optimization
technique. As such, we compare plans generated by BayesQO to
plans from PostgreSQL, Bao, Balsa, and the random non-cross-join
plan generation technique described in section 4.4, which we refer
to as Random. The Random strategy can be seen as representing
the gains from performing offline optimization at all, and we use it
to understand whether our technique brings further improvement
when rethinking the query optimization contract [6].
Instead of actually running Bao, we instead execute all hint sets
(49 total, comprised of all combinations of join and scan hints) and
take the hint set with the fastest runtime. This is the best plan that
Bao could ever produce, since it focuses on steering PostgreSQL’s
existing optimizer using hints. We choose this baseline as represent-
ing the best that traditional heuristic-based query optimizers can do
in the offline query optimization setting. Unless stated otherwise,
all BO runs in the following section are initialized using these 49
hinted “Bao” plans and runtimes.
We choose Balsa [95] as a baseline representing reinforcement
learning-based systems, which are also not originally designed for
Latent Dimension Reconstruction Accuracy
128 97.93%
64 89.67%
32 58.71%
16 24.79%
8 8.49%
Table 2: V AE reconstruction accuracy on the validation set at
different latent dimensions, higher is better.
the offline query optimization setting. We use the default configu-
ration for Balsa, except that we set 𝑆 = 1.5 (the multiplier on query
timeout values), which we found to universally improve results
in our experimental setup. We note that the comparison to Balsa
is not entirely fair: as a reinforcement learning-powered query
optimizer, Balsa seeks to minimize regret, whereas our BO-based
approach seeks to minimize the best latency found. This distinction
is illustrated in Figure 1, but the most important experimental con-
sequence is that Balsa will occasionally repeat a query plan that
it considers to be “good” in order to maximize reward, which is
obviously suboptimal in an offline optimization scenario. In these
experimental results, we use a plan cache to avoid actually execut-
ing any exactly-duplicated query plans.
Random can be thought of as an offline optimization technique
that purely explores the space of possible plans. It learns from
feedback only insofar as it decreases the time spent on bad plans
by settings its timeout to the runtime of the best plan seen (as,
unlike with BO, there is no point in executing plans worse than
the best-seen). The initial timeout greatly affects how many plans
can be tried within a given time budget, as a lower timeout results
in more plans tried within a particular time period, but we do not
know a priori what the runtime of the fastest possible plan is. We
initialize the Random plan generation process with the PostgreSQL
default plan runtime as the initial timeout.
All queries are executed against PostgreSQL version 16.3. For
all workloads, we disable JIT and set join_collapse_limit to
1. Physical operator hints are specified using pg_hint_plan. We
configure PostgreSQL with 32GB shared buffers and 16MB work
memory. For the Stack queries, we disabled GEQO as it was causing
high variability in plan performance.
We create indexes on all join keys on the IMDB, Stack, and
DSB datasets. For Stack, some tables have compound join keys. We
build all indexes such that for each set of join predicates between
two tables present in all queries in the workload, an index exists
containing all of the referenced columns on each side.
Our VAE is based on the transformer VAE architecture intro-
duced in [63]. For each database, the set of training query plans
were divided into an 80%/20% train-test split, over which the VAE
was trained for 800, 000 steps. To determine an appropriate latent
space size, VAEs were trained with varying latent dimensionality
on the IMDB dataset to evaluate the trade-off between compression
and reconstruction, results of which are shown in Table 2. A latent
space of 64 dimensions was chosen as it represented a good balance
between latent dimension and reconstruction accuracy. Each VAE
was trained on 2 Ampere A6000s for ∼ 24 hours. On the GPU cloud
that we were using, this cost roughly $24 for each VAE.
=== PAGE 10 ===
Tao et al.
5.2 Plan Optimization
In order to answer RQ1., we executed each of our baseline opti-
mization techniques for several hours for each query in each of
our three workloads. Figure 3 visualizes the results at the end of
optimization for BO, Balsa, and Random across our three workloads
by comparing the cumulative distribution of queries that achieve at
least a certain percentage improvement in plan runtime compared
to Bao. “% improvement over Bao” refers to the percentage reduc-
tion in plan runtime for a certain query compared to the runtime
of the optimal Bao plan (e.g. a reduction in runtime from 1 second
to 200 milliseconds would be an improvement of 80%). The visual
separation between the series for the different techniques trending
towards the top right of each plot indicates gaps in performance in
which one technique is finding plans for more queries with better
performance than another technique.
We strove to make comparisons between techniques fair by giv-
ing each optimization technique the same optimization budget,
since offline optimization techniques can hypothetically be exe-
cuted for an indefinite amount of time to find potentially faster
plans. We only considered time spent executing proposed plans
against the database as consuming budget and exclude the overhead
of executing each technique (the overhead for BayesQO is analyzed
in Section 5.7). Each optimization technique was executed for 4000
plan executions. We choose this because query runtimes span from
tens of milliseconds to tens of seconds, and we did not want to
optimize some queries with 1000× more observations than others.
These plots make obvious the fact that BayesQO is finding more
plans with better performance compared to the baselines across all
three workloads. JOB and Stack are highly differentiated, while all
techniques perform similarly on CEB. DSB is notable in its propor-
tion of queries for which no technique finds much improvement
over Bao, but for those queries where improvement can be found,
BayesQO is moderately differentiated from the baselines.
5.3 Case Studies
We select three queries from the optimization workloads to illustrate
the different optimization outcomes for BayesQO. The optimization
runs for these three queries are visualized in Figure 4. All three plots
visualize the runtime of the best plan found so far over the course
of an optimization run across all of the optimization techniques.
Bao is visualized as a horizontal line showing the runtime of the
best plan because it cannot improve after its hint sets are executed.
The light blue “Bayes (latest)” line illustrates the runtime of the
plan run most-recently by BO, hence its constant fluctuation as BO
explores the space of possible plans. The𝑥 axis in each of these plots
captures cumulative execution time on the database and ignores
time spent in the rest of the optimization algorithms such as plan
proposal and model updates.
In Figure 4a, we highlight a case where the advantages of BO
are most obvious. In the first hour, BO is exploring the space imme-
diately around its initialization points, executing plans for slightly
longer than the best Bao initialization due to uncertainty-based
timeouts. Around 1.5 hours into the optimization run, it finds a plan
within a trust region that has substantially better performance and
rapidly exploits this new information by trying nearby plans. Note
that in most of the queries made afterwards, timeouts are lowered
to be closer to the new optimal as the BO surrogate model no longer
needs to know if plans are much worse than the new optimal. We
also note that neither Random nor Balsa manages to find a plan
better than the Bao optimal.
In Figure 4b, all optimization strategies converge to the same
best plan runtime after several hours of execution. BO takes notably
longer than Random and Balsa to find this plan. That Random finds
an optimized plan so quickly suggests that the space of possible
plans contains many good plans that perform approximately this
well, but they may be quite different from the initialization points
given to BO. We also note that despite the fact that we give Balsa
training examples including the Bao optimal plan, it begins its
search with plans that are considerably worse before eventually
passing the Bao optimal.
Figure 4c shows a query for which all techniques converge rel-
atively quickly to the same plan runtime and do not make any
progress afterwards. We note that this optimized plan executes in
2ms, which is short enough to be indistinguishable from noise in our
experimental setup. We observe that Balsa takes the longest time
to arrive at this plan whereas the other techniques find it nearly
instantly, which we take as further evidence of the unsuitability
of RL-based algorithms for offline optimization. The plateaus in
Balsa’s progress occur when it is exploiting its best known plan in
order to minimize regret instead of trying to find a faster plan.
5.4 Timeout Ablation Study
To answerRQ2., we justify our usage of a novel timeout strategy, as
well as the choice to perform local BO based on trust regions, 5 via
an ablation study visualized in Figure 5. As described in Section 4.3,
we utilize timeouts in order to manage the impact of executing
terrible plans that take many orders of magnitude longer to execute
than the optimal plan, wasting optimization budget for little gain.
In Figure 5a, we show the results of using different timeout
schemes when optimizing a single JOB query. Intuitively, using
timeouts longer than the runtime of the current best-seen plan (i.e.
the 0th percentile timeout) allows the surrogate model to learn more
about regions of the space of plans that it is less certain about. Since
we use censored observations, two plans (and their surrounding
regions of plan space) will look exactly the same if they both timed
out after 1 second, even if one plan would have executed for 1.2
seconds and the other for 2 hours. By using longer timeouts, the
surrogate model gains greater confidence in whether a particular
region of the space is still promising to explore or if it is clearly
terrible. As shown in the plot, our uncertainty-based method for
determining the timeout threshold results in BO finding faster plans
while consuming less optimization budget. In fact, using the best-
seen runtime as the timeout causes BO to find the worst plan by
the end of optimization, perhaps due to the artificially low timeout
uniformly discouraging BO from exploring the space of plans.
We also justify the choice to use trust region-based local BO
instead of global BO by performing another ablation, shown in
Figure 5b. Our choice to represent the space of plans via the latent
space of a VAE comes at the cost of high dimensionality (64). Though
it is possible in principle that local BO will miss globally optimal
plans, in our experiments we find that local BO initialized with plans
5Which, despite the name, is a global optimization scheme: see Section 4.3.
=== PAGE 11 ===
Learned Offline Query Planning via Bayesian Optimization
1
2
1
2
2
2
3
4
1
1
Figure 3: Best plans found at the end of optimization with each technique for each workload. Towards the top right corner is
better. ❶ On each workload, Random fails to find any improvement over the best Bao plan for 30-50% of queries. ❷ BayesQO
always finds the most improvement compared to the other methods, with this difference being more pronounced on JOB
and Stack than on CEB. On Stack, BayesQO finds over 2 × improvement on 50% of queries. ❸ Balsa underperforms when used
as an offline optimizer on Stack due to longer query runtimes limiting exploration by the RL algorithm. ❹ BayesQO finds
improvement on the ~25% of Stack queries where the other two techniques find none.
0 1h 2h 3h 4h 5h 6h
Optimization time
0
5
10
15
20Runtime (s)
Bao
Bayes (latest)
Bayes (best)
Balsa
Random
(a) STACK_Q2-025: BO finds a better plan than
any of the other techniques
0 1h 2h 3h 4h 5h 6h 7h 8h 9h 10h 11h 12h
Optimization time
0
20
40
60Runtime (s)
(b) CEB_11A102: All techniques find good
plans, though BO takes notably longer.
0 1h 2h 3h 4h 5h 6h 7h 8h
Optimization time
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020Runtime (s)
(c) JOB_1B: All techniques converge to the
same (very small) runtime.
Figure 4: Case studies showing optimization time vs. plan performance for individual queries. Lower is better.
derived from the PostgreSQL optimizer can find highly-optimized
plans for many queries. In the ablation plots, we can see that even
after many hours of optimization, global BO does not catch up to
the quality of plans found by local BO due to the exponentially
larger space of plans that it must explore.
5.5 Data Drift After Optimization
In order to model data drift, we modified the StackOverflow dataset
by deleting all rows in all tables with timestamps after 2017, as well
as the transitive closure of all rows whose foreign keys became
invalidated as a result of deleting those rows. This reduced the
overall dataset size by roughly 20%, with individual tables decreas-
ing in row count between 0% and 28%. This deletion effectively
restored the database to a snapshot from the end of 2017, while the
original StackOverflow dataset snapshot was taken in late 2019. We
present this two year shift as a worst-case scenario for data drift,
expecting that if plan performance were to degrade due to data
drift, it would degrade more over a longer period of time. For the
rest of this section, we will refer to this 2017 snapshot as the “past”
and the original 2019 snapshot as the “future”.
We sought to answer three questions about the impact of data
drift:
RQ3.1. How do the past plans perform in comparison to plans pro-
duced by reoptimizing from scratch on the future dataset?
RQ3.2. Is it important to retrain the VAE for the future dataset
before performing BO?
RQ3.3. Does including the past plan as an initialization point in
the future BO process speed up optimization?
To answerRQ3.1., we trained a VAE for the past dataset using the
procedure described in Section 4.2, planning the sampled queries
using PostgreSQL with the past dataset, akin to conducting the
full BayesQO offline optimization process in the past. We then
performed BO against the past dataset using this past version of
the VAE and a reduced set of 50 (out of our original 200) queries.
We then took the past query plans and executed them against the
future dataset, effectively simulating the real-world use case of
continuing to use previously optimized query plans well past when
data drift may have rendered those plans suboptimal.
The results of executing these past plans against the future
dataset are visualized in the left plot of Figure 6. We compare past
plans against the Bao optimal plans for the future dataset and the
future plans produced by BO from our initial experiment. We also
compare them to the results of performing BO for a short time
(about 1 hour) initialized with the past plan in addition to the Bao
=== PAGE 12 ===
Tao et al.
0 5h 10h 15h 20h 25h 30h
Optimization time
0
5
10
15
20Best Query Runtime (s)
Our Method
No Timeouts
10th Percentile Timeouts
0th Percentile Timeouts
(a) Optimization time vs. best plan runtime for different timeout
schemes when running BO.
0 5h 10h 15h 20h 25h 30h
Optimization time
0
5
10
15
20Best Query Runtime (s)
Our Method
Our Method without Trust Region
(b) Optimization time vs. best plan runtime with and without the
local “Trust Region” optimization.
Figure 5: Ablation study of our novel BO scheme.
plans, discussed further below. Despite the substantial data drift,
past plans perform about as well as if we had performed BO for
the first time on the future dataset and continue to perform much
better than the best Bao hint. This suggests that the optimality of
most of the plans found by BO is not affected much data drift.
We also executed these past and future plans on dates in between
the “past” and “future” endpoints, shown in Figure 7. For the vast
majority of queries, there is not a significant difference in runtime
between the past and future plans, but as shown by the dramatic
increase in runtime of the longest-running past plan, it is indeed
possible for data drift to render a plan suboptimal.
To answer RQ3.2., we performed a set of BO runs against the
future dataset using the VAE trained on the past dataset, simulat-
ing the real-world use case of attempting to perform offline opti-
mization in the future without retraining the VAE. The results are
visualized in the middle plot of Figure 6. We observe that keeping
the VAE up-to-date has a non-negligible effect on the optimality
of plans found by BO. Given the small cost of training the VAE
compared to the rest of the BO process, it seems worthwhile to
periodically retrain the VAE to account for data drift.
To answer RQ3.3., we performed a set of BO runs against the
future dataset initialized with both the Bao initialization and the
optimized past plan, simulating reoptimization when a query had
previously been optimized in the past. For these BO runs, we used
the VAE trained on the future dataset. The aggregate results in red
for reoptimization in the left plot of Figure 6 show not only that
reoptimization to account for data drift is viable, but that it tends
to produce the best plans across the entire workload. In the right
side of the same figure, we observe that the BO runs converge to
optimized plans much more quickly than a run started from scratch.
Reoptimizations ran for an average of 1.5 hours compared to from-
scratch optimization runs, which ran for an average of 8.2 hours.
This suggests that plans generated by BayesQO can be brought
up-to-date to account for data drift while consuming much less
optimization budget than the initial offline optimization run.
5.6 Few-Shot LLM from BO Results
As a byproduct of performing this experimental evaluation, we
generated plans that, to our knowledge, are the best plans that can
currently be found for the queries in our evaluation workloads.
We hypothesized that a large language model fine-tuned using
these high-quality plans could potentially be a better few-shot plan
optimizer than existing techniques. Here, we evaluate the LLM’s
ability to generate initialization points for BayesQO and defer offline
optimization initialized using the LLM outputs to future work.
In order to answer RQ4., we performed two experiments. In the
first experiment, visualized in the top plot of Figure 8, we fine-tuned
GPT-4o mini on the fastest 10 optimized plans for each query from
running BO on the CEB workload as described in Section 4.4. This
training set included queries from all query templates present in
the workload. We then compared the best runtime out of 50 plans
(giving it as many plans as Bao) per-query generated by the LLM
for a particular query against the runtime of the optimal Bao plan.
In the second experiment, we performed the same process, but
withheld BO results from two query templates from the fine-tuning
process. We then performed the same test, comparing the best
runtime out of 50 plans per-query from the LLM against the optimal
Bao plans. The results are visualized in the bottom plot of Figure 8.
The LLM clearly does not perform as well when it has not been
fine-tuned with results from the same query template.
5.7 BayesQO Overhead
We measured the overhead of running BayesQO under multiple
conditions in order to better understand its resource requirements
and to determine if a GPU is necessary to perform optimization.
We recorded time spent in each part of the optimization loop when
executing the BO components on both CPU and GPU while varying
the number of simultaneous BO runs. The results are visualized in
Figure 9. We find that with only one BO run, while overhead on a
CPU is worse than on a GPU, the absolute time spent on overhead
(i.e., everything but query execution) is in the single-digit seconds
range. For sufficiently long-running queries, this CPU overhead
may be tolerable. However, even with just 5 simultaneous runs, we
note that VAE sampling scales significantly better on GPUs than
CPUs – this is attributable to the GPU’s hardware support for scaled
dot product attention [10].
5.8 Comparison to LimeQO
LimeQO [97] is another work that performs offline optimization for
repetitive workloads, but LimeQO and chiefly differs from BayesQO
in that its potential optimizations are limited to finding optimal
hints from a small set, as opposed to BayesQO which constructs
entire join orders. LimeQO uses the hint sets from Bao [55], which
BayesQO also uses to initiate the Bayesian optimization process.
As shown in Figure 10, both techniques explore all of the Bao
hints: once LimeQO has exhausted all of the hints, there are no
remaining avenues for further optimization, whereas BayesQO
continues exploring and finds better plans.
=== PAGE 13 ===
Learned Offline Query Planning via Bayesian Optimization
Median Average P900
2
4
6
8
10
12
14Query runtime (s)
4.83
7.6
13.8
1.91
2.43
5.0
2.07
2.34
4.62
1.73
1.97
4.02
Plan Drift & Reoptimization
Bao
Past Plan
Bao-only BO
Bao + Past Plan BO
Median Average P900
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
2.45
2.62
4.9
2.07
2.34
4.62
BO Using Old vs. Retrained VAE
Past VAE
Retrained VAE
0 1h 2h 3h 4h 5h 6h
Optimization time
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Reoptimization vs. Optimization Time
Bao + Past Plan Init (Median)
Bao Init (Median)
Bao + Past Plan Init (P90)
Bao Init (P90)
Figure 6: Left: Plans from the past vs. plans optimized in the future. Middle: BO run results when using the V AE from the past
vs. the V AE retrained in the future. Right: Optimization speed of BO initialized with Bao vs. those including the past plan.
2018-012018-032018-052018-072018-092018-112019-012019-032019-052019-072019-09
Date
0
1
2
3Runtime (s)
Plan Runtimes vs. Date
Past plan
Future plan
2018-012018-032018-052018-072018-092018-112019-012019-032019-052019-072019-09
Date
0
5
10
15
20
T op 3 Runtimes vs. Date
Future plan
Past plan
1st
2nd
3rd
Figure 7: Left: Performance of plans optimized in the past vs.
plans optimized in the future executed on dates in between.
Shaded regions show the 25th to 75th percentile runtimes.
Right: The top 3 longest plan runtimes per date.
Query100
50
0
50
100
% Difference
-90.51
-90.31
-82.01
-78.77
-74.72
-65.0
-63.85
-61.31
-55.82
-53.91
-50.05
-49.33
-47.54
-46.39
-44.64
-41.01
-40.82
-39.84
-39.12
-38.42
-36.78
-36.73
-34.56
-34.42
-34.33
-33.04
-32.21
-31.9
-31.28
-31.08
-30.85
-30.71
-30.49
-28.61
-28.6
-27.12
-26.96
-26.32
-25.2
-21.84
-21.25
-20.28
-18.71
-18.62
-16.31
-16.14
-16.1
-14.68
-14.45
-13.98
-13.66
-12.09
-12.05
-11.44
-11.2
-11.04
-10.72
-10.51
-10.45
-9.52
-9.4
-8.73
-8.67
-7.74
-7.68
-7.36
-7.19
-7.16
-6.4
-6.12
-6.03
-5.28
-4.25
-3.55
-3.54
-2.53
-2.09
-1.96
-1.78
-1.49
-0.75
-0.52
-0.2
-0.16
1.38
1.46
1.74
3.71
4.23
4.5
5.83
6.86
6.94
6.99
10.77
12.98
14.28
23.37
27.69
84.34
Query100
50
0
50
100
% Difference
-73.33
-68.56
-68.37
-60.71
-59.83
-50.67
-44.87
-36.14
-34.98
-32.29
-31.56
-29.5
-24.95
-21.82
-19.58
-17.79
-16.66
-11.87
-11.14
-7.7
-6.85
-5.25
-5.07
-5.06
-3.31
-2.78
-2.42
-0.37
1.04
2.01
2.08
2.14
4.89
5.55
6.55
7.35
7.55
8.04
8.94
9.02
9.44
9.6
9.91
9.97
10.6
12.57
12.81
13.12
13.83
14.7
16.67
17.14
18.11
18.94
27.32
39.33
39.6
39.86
39.94
42.35
43.35
51.73
52.22
55.44
56.94
60.81
60.87
62.35
62.53
65.1
69.04
87.05
98.64
101.46
104.52
135.11
139.78
154.51
155.01
159.8
164.4
166.78
167.72
178.33
183.14
186.33
239.43
286.99
291.63
292.75
385.03
469.32
536.42
563.97
625.48
782.74
934.44
1191.85
1513.14
1830.41
Figure 8: Top: LLM trained on plans of the same template. Bot-
tom: LLM trained on plans not of the same template. Lower
(more blue) is better.
6 Conclusion
In this work, we presented BayesQO, an offline learned query opti-
mizer. BayesQO uses modern Bayesian optimization techniques to
search for fast query plans for important repeated queries. Experi-
mentally, we show that BayesQO was able to optimize nearly every
CPU (Median) CPU (P90) GPU (Median) GPU (P90)
0
2
4Time (s)
1x Runs
CPU (Median) CPU (P90) GPU (Median) GPU (P90)
0
100
200
300Time (s)
5x Runs
Surrogate Update
Calculate Timeout
VAE Sampling
Generate Candidates
Figure 9: Overheads per iteration of BO. Top: 1x simultaneous
BO run. Bottom: 5x simultaneous BO runs.
query in a set of common, non-synthetic benchmarks, sometimes
achieving multiple orders-of-magnitude improvements.
In the future, we plan to integrate BayesQO into a wider variety
of database systems. Given the promising results from our LLM
experiment, we plan to investigate how we can “close the loop, ”
using the LLM to generate initialization data for future optimization
runs. We are also excited to examine how Bayesian optimization
can be applied to other databases problems such as automatic index
selection, data layout, and benchmark curation.
References
[1] Christoph Anneser, Nesime Tatbul, David Cohen, Zhenggang Xu, Prithvi Pan-
dian, Nikolay Leptev, and Ryan Marcus. 2023. AutoSteer: Learned Query
Optimization for Any SQL Database. PVLDB 14, 1 (Aug. 2023). https:
//doi.org/10.14778/3611540.3611544
[2] M. M. Astrahan, M. W. Blasgen, D. D. Chamberlin, K. P. Eswaran, J. N. Gray,
P. P. Griffiths, W. F. King, R. A. Lorie, P. R. McJones, J. W. Mehl, G. R. Putzolu,
I. L. Traiger, B. W. Wade, and V. Watson. 1976. System R: relational approach
to database management. ACM Trans. Database Syst. 1, 2 (jun 1976), 97–137.
https://doi.org/10.1145/320455.320457
[3] Shivnath Babu, Pedro Bizarro, and David DeWitt. 2005. Proactive re-
optimization with Rio. In Proceedings of the 2005 ACM SIGMOD international
conference on Management of data (SIGMOD ’05). Association for Computing Ma-
chinery, New York, NY, USA, 936–938. https://doi.org/10.1145/1066157.1066294
[4] Henriette Behr, Volker Markl, and Zoi Kaoudi. 2023. Learn What Really Matters:
A Learning-to-Rank Approach for ML-based Query Optimization. In Data-
base Systems for Business, Technology, and the Web 2023 (BTW ’23) , Birgitta
König-Ries, Stefanie Scherzinger, Wolfgang Lehner, and Gottfried Vossen (Eds.).
=== PAGE 14 ===
Tao et al.
1.00s 10.00s 1m 16m 2h46m
Optimization time
0
100Runtime (s)
Sum
LimeQO
BayesQO
1.00s 10.00s 1m 16m 2h46m
Optimization time
0.0
0.2Runtime (s)
Median
1.00s 10.00s 1m 16m 2h46m
Optimization time
0
2Runtime (s)
P90
Figure 10: Optimization using BayesQO vs. LimeQO across
the entire JOB. Lower is better. The x-axis is log scale so both
final performance and the initial improvement is visible.
Gesellschaft für Informatik e.V. https://doi.org/10.18420/BTW2023-25
[5] Stefano Cereda, Stefano Valladares, Paolo Cremonesi, and Stefano Doni. 2021.
CGPTuner: a contextual gaussian process bandit approach for the automatic
tuning of IT configurations under varying workload conditions. Proc. VLDB
Endow. 14, 8 (apr 2021), 1401–1413. https://doi.org/10.14778/3457390.3457404
[6] Surajit Chaudhuri. 2009. Query optimizers: time to rethink the contract?. In
Proceedings of the 2009 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of
Data (Providence, Rhode Island, USA)(SIGMOD ’09). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 961–968. https://doi.org/10.1145/1559845.
1559955
[7] Tianyi Chen, Jun Gao, Hedui Chen, and Yaofeng Tu. 2023. LOGER: A Learned
Optimizer Towards Generating Efficient and Robust Query Execution Plans.
Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 16, 7 (March 2023), 1777–1789. https:
//doi.org/10.14778/3587136.3587150
[8] Xu Chen, Haitian Chen, Zibo Liang, Shuncheng Liu, Jinghong Wang, Kai Zeng,
Han Su, and Kai Zheng. 2023. LEON: A New Framework for ML-Aided Query
Optimization. Proc. VLDB Endow. 16, 9 (May 2023), 2261–2273. https://doi.org/
10.14778/3598581.3598597
[9] Guilherme Damasio, Vincent Corvinelli, Parke Godfrey, Piotr Mierzejewski,
Alex Mihaylov, Jaroslaw Szlichta, and Calisto Zuzarte. 2019. Guided automated
learning for query workload re-optimization. Proceedings of the VLDB Endow-
ment 12, 12 (Aug. 2019), 2010–2021. https://doi.org/10.14778/3352063.3352120
[10] Tri Dao, Daniel Y. Fu, Stefano Ermon, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré. 2022.
FlashAttention: Fast and Memory-Efficient Exact Attention with IO-Awareness.
arXiv:2205.14135 [cs.LG] https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.14135
[11] Aryan Deshwal and Janardhan Rao Doppa. 2021. Combining Latent Space and
Structured Kernels for Bayesian Optimization over Combinatorial Spaces.CoRR
abs/2111.01186 (2021). arXiv:2111.01186 https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.01186
[12] Bailu Ding, Surajit Chaudhuri, Johannes Gehrke, and Vivek Narasayya. 2021.
DSB: a decision support benchmark for workload-driven and traditional data-
base systems. Proc. VLDB Endow. 14, 13 (Sept. 2021), 3376–3388. https:
//doi.org/10.14778/3484224.3484234
[13] Rui Dong, Jie Liu, Yuxuan Zhu, Cong Yan, Barzan Mozafari, and Xinyu
Wang. 2023. SlabCity: Whole-Query Optimization Using Program Synthe-
sis. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 16, 11 (July 2023), 3151–3164. https:
//doi.org/10.14778/3611479.3611515
[14] Lyric Doshi, Vincent Zhuang, Gaurav Jain, Ryan Marcus, Haoyu Huang, Deniz
Altinbuken, Eugene Brevdo, and Campbell Fraser. 2023. Kepler: Robust Learning
for Faster Parametric Query Optimization.Proceedings of the 2023 ACM SIGMOD
Conference 1, 1 (May 2023), 109. https://doi.org/10.1145/3588963
[15] Jennie Duggan, Ugur Cetintemel, Olga Papaemmanouil, and Eli Upfal. 2011.
Performance Prediction for Concurrent Database Workloads. In Proceedings
of the 2011 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data
(SIGMOD ’11). ACM, Athens, Greece, 337–348. https://doi.org/10.1145/1989323.
1989359 tex.acmid= 1989359 tex.numpages= 12.
[16] Jennie Duggan, Olga Papaemmanouil, Ugur Cetintemel, and Eli Upfal. 2014.
Contender: A Resource Modeling Approach for Concurrent Query Performance
Prediction. In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Extending
Database Technology (EDBT ’14). 109–120.
[17] Katharina Eggensperger, Kai Haase, Philipp Müller, Marius Lindauer, and Frank
Hutter. 2020. Neural Model-based Optimization with Right-Censored Observa-
tions. arXiv:2009.13828 [cs.AI]
[18] Katharina Eggensperger, Kai Haase, Philipp Müller, Marius Lindauer, and Frank
Hutter. 2020. Neural Model-based Optimization with Right-Censored Observa-
tions. arXiv:2009.13828 [cs.AI] https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.13828
[19] Stephan Eissman, Daniel Levy, Rui Shu, Stefan Bartzsch, and Stefano Ermon.
2018. Bayesian optimization and attribute adjustment. In Proc. 34th Conference
on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence.
[20] David Eriksson and Martin Jankowiak. 2021. High-dimensional Bayesian op-
timization with sparse axis-aligned subspaces. In Proceedings of the Thirty-
Seventh Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence . PMLR, 493–503.
https://proceedings.mlr.press/v161/eriksson21a.html ISSN: 2640-3498.
[21] David Eriksson, Michael Pearce, Jacob Gardner, Ryan D Turner, and Matthias
Poloczek. 2019. Scalable Global Optimization via Local Bayesian Op-
timization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . 5496–
5507. http://papers.nips.cc/paper/8788-scalable-global-optimization-via-local-
bayesian-optimization.pdf
[22] David Eriksson, Michael Pearce, Jacob R Gardner, Ryan Turner, and Matthias
Poloczek. 2019. Scalable global optimization via local Bayesian optimization. In
Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems (NeurIPS ’19). Curran Associates Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA, 5496–5507.
[23] Peter Frazier, Warren Powell, and Savas Dayanik. 2009. The knowledge-gradient
policy for correlated normal beliefs. INFORMS journal on Computing 21, 4 (2009),
599–613.
[24] Roman Garnett. 2023. Bayesian Optimization. Cambridge University Press.
[25] Damjan Gjurovski, Angjela Davitkova, and Sebastian Michel. 2024. Grid-AR:
A Grid-based Booster for Learned Cardinality Estimation and Range Joins.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2410.07895 arXiv:2410.07895 [cs].
[26] Rafael Gómez-Bombarelli, Jennifer N Wei, David Duvenaud, José Miguel
Hernández-Lobato, Benjamín Sánchez-Lengeling, Dennis Sheberla, Jorge
Aguilera-Iparraguirre, Timothy D Hirzel, Ryan P Adams, and Alán Aspuru-
Guzik. 2018. Automatic chemical design using a data-driven continuous repre-
sentation of molecules. ACS central science 4, 2 (2018), 268–276.
[27] Goetz Graefe. 1995. The Cascades Framework for Query Optimization. IEEE
Data Eng. Bull. 18, 3 (1995), 19–29.
[28] Antoine Grosnit, Rasul Tutunov, Alexandre Max Maraval, Ryan-Rhys Grif-
fiths, Alexander Imani Cowen-Rivers, Lin Yang, Lin Zhu, Wenlong Lyu, Zhitang
Chen, Jun Wang, Jan Peters, and Haitham Bou-Ammar. 2021. High-Dimensional
Bayesian Optimisation with Variational Autoencoders and Deep Metric Learn-
ing. CoRR abs/2106.03609 (2021). arXiv:2106.03609
[29] James Hensman, Nicolò Fusi, and Neil D. Lawrence. 2013. Gaussian processes
for Big data. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth Conference on Uncertainty in
Artificial Intelligence (Bellevue, WA) (UAI’13). AUAI Press, Arlington, Virginia,
USA, 282–290.
[30] James Hensman, Alex Matthews, and Zoubin Ghahramani. 2014. Scalable
Variational Gaussian Process Classification. arXiv:1411.2005 [stat.ML]
[31] Benjamin Hilprecht and Carsten Binnig. 2022. Zero-shot cost models for out-
of-the-box learned cost prediction. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 15, 11
(July 2022), 2361–2374. https://doi.org/10.14778/3551793.3551799
[32] Frank Hutter, Holger Hoos, and Kevin Leyton-Brown. 2013. Bayesian Op-
timization With Censored Response Data. arXiv:1310.1947 [cs.AI] https:
//arxiv.org/abs/1310.1947
[33] Frank Hutter, Holger H. Hoos, and Kevin Leyton-Brown. 2013. Bayesian
Optimization With Censored Response Data. CoRR abs/1310.1947 (2013).
arXiv:1310.1947 http://arxiv.org/abs/1310.1947
[34] Immanuel Trummer. 2022. GenesisDB: Synthesizing Customized SQL Execution
Engines from Natural Language Instructions Using GPT-3 Codex . Technical
Report. Cornell, Ithaca. NY. https://rm.cab/genesisdb
[35] Wengong Jin, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi S. Jaakkola. 2018. Junction Tree
Variational Autoencoder for Molecular Graph Generation. In Proceedings of the
35th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2018, Stockholmsmäs-
san, Stockholm, Sweden, July 10-15, 2018 (Proceedings of Machine Learning Re-
search, Vol. 80), Jennifer G. Dy and Andreas Krause (Eds.). PMLR, 2328–2337.
http://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/jin18a.html
[36] Hiroshi Kajino. 2019. Molecular hypergraph grammar with its application to
molecular optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR,
3183–3191.
[37] Amin Kamali, Verena Kantere, Calisto Zuzarte, and Vincent Corvinelli. 2024.
RobOpt: A Tool for Robust Workload Optimization Based on Uncertainty-
Aware Machine Learning. In Companion of the 2024 International Conference
on Management of Data (SIGMOD ’24). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 468–471. https://doi.org/10.1145/3626246.3654755
=== PAGE 15 ===
Learned Offline Query Planning via Bayesian Optimization
[38] Amin Kamali, Verena Kantere, Calisto Zuzarte, and Vincent Corvinelli. 2024.
Roq: Robust Query Optimization Based on a Risk-aware Learned Cost Model.
(2024). https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2401.15210
[39] Konstantinos Kanellis, Cong Ding, Brian Kroth, Andreas Müller, Carlo Curino,
and Shivaram Venkataraman. 2022. LlamaTune: sample-efficient DBMS con-
figuration tuning. Proc. VLDB Endow. 15, 11 (July 2022), 2953–2965. https:
//doi.org/10.14778/3551793.3551844
[40] Kyoungmin Kim, Sangoh Lee, Injung Kim, and Wook-Shin Han. 2024. ASM:
Harmonizing Autoregressive Model, Sampling, and Multi-dimensional Statistics
Merging for Cardinality Estimation. Proceedings of the ACM on Management of
Data 2, 1 (March 2024), 1–27. https://doi.org/10.1145/3639300
[41] Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. 2014. Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes.
In 2nd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2014, Banff,
AB, Canada, April 14-16, 2014, Conference Track Proceedings , Yoshua Bengio and
Yann LeCun (Eds.). http://arxiv.org/abs/1312.6114
[42] Andreas Kipf, Thomas Kipf, Bernhard Radke, Viktor Leis, Peter Boncz, and
Alfons Kemper. 2019. Learned Cardinalities: Estimating Correlated Joins with
Deep Learning. In 9th Biennial Conference on Innovative Data Systems Research
(CIDR ’19). http://arxiv.org/abs/1809.00677
[43] Mario Krenn, Florian Häse, AkshatKumar Nigam, Pascal Friederich, and Alán
Aspuru-Guzik. 2020. Self-Referencing Embedded Strings (SELFIES): A 100%
robust molecular string representation. Machine Learning: Science and Tech-
nology 1, 4 (Dec. 2020), 045024. https://doi.org/10.1088/2632-2153/aba947
arXiv:1905.13741 [physics, physics:quant-ph, stat].
[44] Jiale Lao, Yibo Wang, Yufei Li, Jianping Wang, Yunjia Zhang, Zhiyuan Cheng,
Wanghu Chen, Mingjie Tang, and Jianguo Wang. 2024. GPTuner: A Manual-
Reading Database Tuning System via GPT-Guided Bayesian Optimization. Proc.
VLDB Endow. 17, 8 (may 2024), 1939–1952. https://doi.org/10.14778/3659437.
3659449
[45] Viktor Leis, Andrey Gubichev, Atanas Mirchev, Peter Boncz, Alfons Kemper,
and Thomas Neumann. 2015. How Good Are Query Optimizers, Really? PVLDB
9, 3 (2015), 204–215. https://doi.org/10.14778/2850583.2850594
[46] Viktor Leis, Andrey Gubichev, Atanas Mirchev, Peter Boncz, Alfons Kemper, and
Thomas Neumann. 2015. How good are query optimizers, really? Proc. VLDB
Endow. 9, 3 (nov 2015), 204–215. https://doi.org/10.14778/2850583.2850594
[47] Guoliang Li, Xuanhe Zhou, Ji Sun, Xiang Yu, Yue Han, Lianyuan Jin, Wenbo
Li, Tianqing Wang, and Shifu Li. 2021. openGauss: an autonomous database
system. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 14, 12 (July 2021), 3028–3042.
https://doi.org/10.14778/3476311.3476380
[48] Pengfei Li, Wenqing Wei, Rong Zhu, Bolin Ding, Jingren Zhou, and Hua Lu. 2023.
ALECE: An Attention-based Learned Cardinality Estimator for SPJ Queries
on Dynamic Workloads. Proc. VLDB Endow. 17, 2 (Oct. 2023), 197–210. https:
//doi.org/10.14778/3626292.3626302
[49] Wan Shen Lim, Lin Ma, William Zhang, Matthew Butrovich, Samuel Arch, and
Andrew Pavlo. 2024. Hit the Gym: Accelerating Query Execution to Efficiently
Bootstrap Behavior Models for Self-Driving Database Management Systems.
Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 17, 11 (July 2024), 3680–3693. https:
//doi.org/10.14778/3681954.3682030
[50] Mengmeng Liu, Zachary G. Ives, and Boon Thau Loo. 2016. Enabling Incremen-
tal Query Re-Optimization. In Proceedings of the 2016 International Conference
on Management of Data (SIGMOD ’16). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 1705–1720. https://doi.org/10.1145/2882903.2915212
[51] Guy Lohman. 2014. Is Query Optimization a "Solved" Problem?. InACM SIGMOD
Blog (ACM Blog ’14). https://wp.sigmod.org/?p=1075
[52] Hongjun Lu, K. Tan, and S. Dao. 1995. The Fittest Survives: An Adaptive
Approach to Query Optimization (VLDB ’95). Zurich, Switzerland. https:
//www.semanticscholar.org/paper/The-Fittest-Survives%3A-An-Adaptive-
Approach-to-Query-Lu-Tan/3d2625f15445adc9dd23324d4839c5dd364630fa
[53] Wesley J Maddox, Samuel Stanton, and Andrew G Wilson. 2021. Conditioning
sparse variational gaussian processes for online decision-making. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 34 (2021), 6365–6379.
[54] Ryan Marcus. 2023. Learned Query Superoptimization. In Joint Workshops at
49th International Conference on Very Large Data Bases (AIDB@VLDB ’23). CEUR
Workshop Proceedings, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
[55] Ryan Marcus, Parimarjan Negi, Hongzi Mao, Nesime Tatbul, Mohammad Al-
izadeh, and Tim Kraska. 2021. Bao: Making Learned Query Optimization Prac-
tical. In Proceedings of the 2021 International Conference on Management of Data
(Virtual Event, China) (SIGMOD ’21). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 1275–1288. https://doi.org/10.1145/3448016.3452838
[56] Ryan Marcus, Parimarjan Negi, Hongzi Mao, Chi Zhang, Mohammad Alizadeh,
Tim Kraska, Olga Papaemmanouil, and Nesime Tatbul. 2019. Neo: a learned
query optimizer. Proc. VLDB Endow. 12, 11 (jul 2019), 1705–1718. https://doi.
org/10.14778/3342263.3342644
[57] Ryan Marcus and Olga Papaemmanouil. 2018. Deep Reinforcement Learning for
Join Order Enumeration. In First International Workshop on Exploiting Artificial
Intelligence Techniques for Data Management (aiDM @ SIGMOD ’18) . Houston,
TX.
[58] Ryan Marcus and Olga Papaemmanouil. 2019. Plan-Structured Deep Neural
Network Models for Query Performance Prediction. PVLDB 12, 11 (2019),
1733–1746. https://doi.org/10.14778/3342263.3342646
[59] V. Markl, P. J. Haas, M. Kutsch, N. Megiddo, U. Srivastava, and T. M. Tran. 2007.
Consistent selectivity estimation via maximum entropy. The VLDB Journal 16,
1 (Jan. 2007), 55–76. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00778-006-0030-1
[60] Alexia Massalin. 1987. Superoptimizer: a look at the smallest program. ACM
SIGARCH Computer Architecture News 15, 5 (Oct. 1987), 122–126. https://doi.
org/10.1145/36177.36194
[61] Natalie Maus, Haydn Jones, Juston Moore, Matt J. Kusner, John Brad-
shaw, and Jacob R. Gardner. 2022. Local Latent Space Bayesian Opti-
mization over Structured Inputs. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems 35: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems 2022, NeurIPS 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA, November 28 - Decem-
ber 9, 2022 , Sanmi Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave,
K. Cho, and A. Oh (Eds.). http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/hash/
ded98d28f82342a39f371c013dfb3058-Abstract-Conference.html
[62] Natalie Maus, Haydn Thomas Jones, Juston Moore, Matt Kusner, John Brad-
shaw, and Jacob R. Gardner. 2022. Local Latent Space Bayesian Optimiza-
tion over Structured Inputs (NeurIPS ’22). https://openreview.net/forum?id=
nZRTRevUO-
[63] Natalie T. Maus, Haydn T. Jones, Juston S. Moore, Matt J. Kusner, John Bradshaw,
and Jacob R. Gardner. 2024. Local latent space Bayesian optimization over
structured inputs. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems (New Orleans, LA, USA) (NIPS ’22). Curran
Associates Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA, Article 2500, 14 pages.
[64] Mert Akdere and Ugur Cetintemel. 2012. Learning-based query performance
modeling and prediction. In 2012 IEEE 28th International Conference on Data
Engineering (ICDE ’12). IEEE, 390–401.
[65] Songsong Mo, Yile Chen, Hao Wang, Gao Cong, and Zhifeng Bao. 2023. Lemo:
A Cache-Enhanced Learned Optimizer for Concurrent Queries. Proc. ACM
Manag. Data 1, 4 (Dec. 2023), 247:1–247:26. https://doi.org/10.1145/3626734
[66] Parimarjan Negi, Matteo Interlandi, Ryan Marcus, Mohammad Alizadeh, Tim
Kraska, Marc Friedman, and Alekh Jindal. 2021. Steering Query Optimizers:
A Practical Take on Big Data Workloads. In Proceedings of the 2021 Interna-
tional Conference on Management of Data (SIGMOD ’21). ACM, Virtual Event
China, 2557–2569. https://doi.org/10.1145/3448016.3457568 Award: ’best paper
honorable mention’.
[67] Parimarjan Negi, Ryan Marcus, Andreas Kipf, Hongzi Mao, Nesime Tatbul,
Tim Kraska, and Mohammad Alizadeh. 2021. Flow-Loss: Learning Cardinality
Estimates That Matter. Proc. VLDB Endow. 14, 11 (jul 2021), 2019–2032. https:
//doi.org/10.14778/3476249.3476259
[68] Kiyoshi Ono and Guy M. Lohman. 1990. Measuring the Complexity of Join
Enumeration in Query Optimization. In VLDB (VLDB ’90). 314–325. http:
//dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=645916.671976
[69] Jennifer Ortiz, Magdalena Balazinska, Johannes Gehrke, and S. Sathiya Keerthi.
2018. Learning State Representations for Query Optimization with Deep Re-
inforcement Learning. In 2nd Workshop on Data Managmeent for End-to-End
Machine Learning (DEEM ’18). https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.08604
[70] Yongjoo Park, Shucheng Zhong, and Barzan Mozafari. 2018. QuickSel: Quick
Selectivity Learning with Mixture Models. arXiv:1812.10568 [cs] (Dec. 2018).
http://arxiv.org/abs/1812.10568
[71] Matthew Perron, Zeyuan Shang, Tim Kraska, and Michael Stonebraker. 2019.
How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love Re-optimization. 2019 IEEE 35th
International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE) (April 2019), 1758–1761.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDE.2019.00191 Conference Name: 2019 IEEE 35th
International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE) ISBN: 9781538674741
Place: Macao, Macao Publisher: IEEE.
[72] PostgreSQL Developers. 2024. PostgreSQL hints,
https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/runtime-config-query.html.
https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/runtime-config-query.html tex.key=
1.
[73] Silvan Reiner and Michael Grossniklaus. 2024. Sample-Efficient Cardinality
Estimation Using Geometric Deep Learning. Proc. VLDB Endow. 17, 4 (March
2024), 740–752. https://doi.org/10.14778/3636218.3636229
[74] Tobias Schmidt, Andreas Kipf, Dominik Horn, Gaurav Saxena, and Tim Kraska.
2024. Predicate Caching: Query-Driven Secondary Indexing for Cloud Data
Warehouses. In Companion of the 2024 International Conference on Management
of Data (SIGMOD ’24). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 347–359. https://doi.org/10.1145/3626246.3653395
[75] Bobak Shahriari, Kevin Swersky, Ziyu Wang, Ryan P. Adams, and Nando de
Freitas. 2016. Taking the Human Out of the Loop: A Review of Bayesian
Optimization. Proc. IEEE 104, 1 (Jan. 2016), 148–175. https://doi.org/10.1109/
JPROC.2015.2494218
[76] Ohad Shamir, Sivan Sabato, and Naftali Tishby. 2010. Learning and general-
ization with the information bottleneck. Theoretical Computer Science 411, 29
(June 2010), 2696–2711. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcs.2010.04.006
=== PAGE 16 ===
Tao et al.
[77] Alexander Shypula, Aman Madaan, Yimeng Zeng, Uri Alon, Jacob Gardner,
Milad Hashemi, Graham Neubig, Parthasarathy Ranganathan, Osbert Bastani,
and Amir Yazdanbakhsh. 2024. Learning Performance-Improving Code Edits.
In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .
https://openreview.net/pdf?id=ix7rLVHXyY
[78] Ji Sun and Guoliang Li. 2019. An end-to-end learning-based cost estimator.
Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 13, 3 (Nov. 2019), 307–319. https://doi.org/
10.14778/3368289.3368296
[79] Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. 1998. Introduction to Reinforcement
Learning (1st ed.). MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA.
[80] Kai Sheng Tai, Richard Socher, and Christopher D. Manning. 2015. Improved
Semantic Representations From Tree-Structured Long Short-Term Memory
Networks. arXiv:1503.00075 [cs] (Feb. 2015). http://arxiv.org/abs/1503.00075
[81] William R. Thompson. 1933. On the Likelihood that One Unknown Probability
Exceeds Another in View of the Evidence of Two Samples. Biometrika (1933).
[82] Michalis K. Titsias. 2009. Variational Learning of Inducing Variables in Sparse
Gaussian Processes. In Proceedings of the Twelfth International Conference on
Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, AISTATS 2009, Clearwater Beach, Florida, USA,
April 16-18, 2009 (JMLR Proceedings, Vol. 5) , David A. Van Dyk and Max Welling
(Eds.). JMLR.org, 567–574. http://proceedings.mlr.press/v5/titsias09a.html
[83] Austin Tripp, Erik A. Daxberger, and José Miguel Hernández-Lobato. 2020.
Sample-Efficient Optimization in the Latent Space of Deep Generative Models
via Weighted Retraining. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
33.
[84] Immanuel Trummer, Samuel Moseley, Deepak Maram, Saehan Jo, and Joseph
Antonakakis. 2018. SkinnerDB: Regret-bounded Query Evaluation via Rein-
forcement Learning. PVLDB 11, 12 (2018), 2074–2077. https://doi.org/10.14778/
3229863.3236263
[85] Robin Van De Water, Francesco Ventura, Zoi Kaoudi, Jorge-Arnulfo Quiané-
Ruiz, and Volker Markl. 2022. Farming Your ML-based Query Optimizer’s Food.
In 2022 IEEE 38th International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE) (ICDE ’22).
3186–3189. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDE53745.2022.00294 ISSN: 2375-026X.
[86] Alexander van Renen, Dominik Horn, Pascal Pfeil, Kapil Eknath Vaidya,
Wenjian Dong, Murali Narayanaswamy, Zhengchun Liu, Gaurav Saxena,
Andreas Kipf, and Tim Kraska. 2024. Why TPC is not enough: An anal-
ysis of the Amazon Redshift fleet. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment
(2024). https://www.amazon.science/publications/why-tpc-is-not-enough-
an-analysis-of-the-amazon-redshift-fleet
[87] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones,
Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is All
you Need. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS
’17, Vol. 30). Curran Associates, Inc. https://papers.nips.cc/paper/2017/hash/
3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Abstract.html
[88] F. Michael Waas and Arjan Pellenkoft. 2000. Join Order Selection - Good Enough
Is Easy. InBritish National Conference on Databases. https://api.semanticscholar.
org/CorpusID:15111246
[89] David Weininger. 1988. SMILES, a chemical language and information system.
1. Introduction to methodology and encoding rules. Journal of Chemical In-
formation and Computer Sciences 28, 1 (1988), 31–36. https://doi.org/10.1021/
ci00057a005 arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1021/ci00057a005
[90] Lianggui Weng, Rong Zhu, Di Wu, Bolin Ding, Bolong Zheng, and Jingren Zhou.
2024. Eraser: Eliminating Performance Regression on Learned Query Optimizer.
PVLDB 17, 5 (2024), 926–938. https://doi.org/10.14778/3641204.3641205
[91] Lucas Woltmann, Jerome Thiessat, Claudio Hartmann, Dirk Habich, and Wolf-
gang Lehner. 2023. FASTgres: Making Learned Query Optimizer Hinting Ef-
fective. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 16, 11 (Aug. 2023), 3310–3322.
https://doi.org/10.14778/3611479.3611528
[92] Peizhi Wu and Zachary G. Ives. 2024. Modeling Shifting Workloads for Learned
Database Systems. Proceedings of the ACM on Management of Data 2, 1 (March
2024), 1–27. https://doi.org/10.1145/3639293
[93] Ziniu Wu, Ryan Marcus, Zhengchun Liu, Parimarjan Negi, Vikram Nathan, Pas-
cal Pfeil, Gaurav Saxena, Mohammad Rahman, Balakrishnan Narayanaswamy,
and Tim Kraska. 2024. Stage: Query Execution Time Prediction in Amazon
Redshift. In Proceedings of the 2024 International Conference on Management of
Data (SIGMOD ’24) (SIGMOD ’24). Santiago, Chile. https://doi.org/10.48550/
arXiv.2403.02286
[94] Ziniu Wu, Ryan Marcus, Zhengchun Liu, Parimarjan Negi, Vikram Nathan, Pas-
cal Pfeil, Gaurav Saxena, Mohammad Rahman, Balakrishnan Narayanaswamy,
and Tim Kraska. 2024. Stage: Query Execution Time Prediction in Amazon
Redshift. In Companion of the 2024 International Conference on Management of
Data (Santiago AA, Chile) (SIGMOD/PODS ’24). Association for Computing Ma-
chinery, New York, NY, USA, 280–294. https://doi.org/10.1145/3626246.3653391
[95] Zongheng Yang, Wei-Lin Chiang, Sifei Luan, Gautam Mittal, Michael Luo, and
Ion Stoica. 2022. Balsa: Learning a Query Optimizer Without Expert Demonstra-
tions. In Proceedings of the 2022 International Conference on Management of Data .
ACM, Philadelphia PA USA, 931–944. https://doi.org/10.1145/3514221.3517885
[96] Zongheng Yang, Amog Kamsetty, Sifei Luan, Eric Liang, Yan Duan, Xi Chen,
and Ion Stoica. 2020. NeuroCard: One Cardinality Estimator for All Tables.
arXiv:2006.08109 [cs] (June 2020). http://arxiv.org/abs/2006.08109 arXiv:
2006.08109.
[97] Zixuan Yi, Yao Tian, Zachary G. Ives, and Ryan Marcus. 2024. Low Rank
Approximation for Learned Query Optimization. In International Workshop
on Exploiting Artificial Intelligence Techniques for Data Management (aiDM @
SIGMOD ’24). ACM, Santiago, Chile. https://doi.org/10.1145/3663742.3663974
[98] Xiang Yu, Chengliang Chai, Guoliang Li, and Jiabin Liu. 2022. Cost-Based
or Learning-Based? A Hybrid Query Optimizer for Query Plan Selection.
Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 15, 13 (Sept. 2022), 3924–3936. https:
//doi.org/10.14778/3565838.3565846
[99] Xiang Yu, Guoliang Li, Chengliang Chai, and Nan Tang. 2020. Reinforce-
ment Learning with Tree-LSTM for Join Order Selection. In 2020 IEEE 36th
International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE ’20) . 1297–1308. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/ICDE48307.2020.00116 ISSN: 2375-026X.
[100] Wangda Zhang, Matteo Interlandi, Paul Mineiro, Shi Qiao, Nasim Ghazanfari,
Karlen Lie, Marc Friedman, Rafah Hosn, Hiren Patel, and Alekh Jindal. 2022.
Deploying a Steered Query Optimizer in Production at Microsoft. InProceedings
of the 2022 International Conference on Management of Data (SIGMOD ’22). ACM,
Philadelphia PA USA, 2299–2311. https://doi.org/10.1145/3514221.3526052
[101] Xinyi Zhang, Zhuo Chang, Yang Li, Hong Wu, Jian Tan, Feifei Li, and Bin
Cui. 2022. Facilitating database tuning with hyper-parameter optimization: a
comprehensive experimental evaluation. Proc. VLDB Endow. 15, 9 (may 2022),
1808–1821. https://doi.org/10.14778/3538598.3538604
[102] Yue Zhao, Gao Cong, Jiachen Shi, and Chunyan Miao. 2022. QueryFormer: a
tree transformer model for query plan representation. Proceedings of the VLDB
Endowment 15, 8 (April 2022), 1658–1670. https://doi.org/10.14778/3529337.
3529349
[103] Xuanhe Zhou, Guoliang Li, Chengliang Chai, and Jianhua Feng. 2021. A learned
query rewrite system using Monte Carlo tree search. Proceedings of the VLDB
Endowment 15, 1 (Sept. 2021), 46–58. https://doi.org/10.14778/3485450.3485456
[104] Rong Zhu, Wei Chen, Bolin Ding, Xingguang Chen, Andreas Pfadler, Ziniu Wu,
and Jingren Zhou. 2023. Lero: A Learning-to-Rank Query Optimizer.Proc. VLDB
Endow. 16, 6 (feb 2023), 1466–1479. https://doi.org/10.14778/3583140.3583160
[105] Rong Zhu, Lianggui Weng, Wenqing Wei, Di Wu, Jiazhen Peng, Yifan Wang,
Bolin Ding, Defu Lian, Bolong Zheng, and Jingren Zhou. 2024. PilotScope:
Steering Databases with Machine Learning Drivers. PVLDB 17, 5 (2024), 980–
993. https://doi.org/10.14778/3641204.3641209
[106] Sergey Zinchenko and Sergey Iazov. 2024. HERO: Hint-Based Efficient
and Reliable Query Optimizer. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2412.02372
arXiv:2412.02372 [cs].