=== PAGE 1 ===
Lero: A Learning-to-Rank Query Optimizer
Rong Zhu#, Wei Chen#
Alibaba Group
Hangzhou, China
{red.zr,wickeychen.cw}@alibaba-
inc.com
Bolin Ding
Alibaba Group
Hangzhou, China
bolin.ding@alibaba-inc.com
Xingguang Chen
Alibaba Group, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong
Hangzhou, China
xgchen@link.cuhk.edu.hk
Andreas Pfadler
Alibaba Group
Hangzhou, China
andreaswernerrober@alibaba-
inc.com
Ziniu Wu
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
MA, USA
ziniuw@mit.edu
Jingren Zhou∗
Alibaba Group
Hangzhou, China
jingren.zhou@alibaba-inc.com
ABSTRACT
A recent line of works apply machine learning techniques to assist
or rebuild cost-based query optimizers in DBMS. While exhibiting
superiority in some benchmarks, their deficiencies, e.g., unstable
performance, high training cost, and slow model updating, stem
from the inherent hardness of predicting the cost or latency of
execution plans using machine learning models. In this paper, we
introduce a learning-to-rank query optimizer, called Lero, which
builds on top of a native query optimizer and continuously learns
to improve the optimization performance. The key observation is
that the relative order or rank of plans, rather than the exact cost or
latency, is sufficient for query optimization.Lero employs a pairwise
approach to train a classifier to compare any two plans and tell
which one is better. Such a binary classification task is much easier
than the regression task to predict the cost or latency, in terms
of model efficiency and accuracy. Rather than building a learned
optimizer from scratch, Lero is designed to leverage decades of
wisdom of databases and improve the native query optimizer. With
its non-intrusive design, Lero can be implemented on top of any
existing DBMS with minimal integration efforts. We implementLero
and demonstrate its outstanding performance using PostgreSQL.
In our experiments, Lero achieves near optimal performance on
several benchmarks. It reduces the plan execution time of the native
optimizer in PostgreSQL by up to 70% and other learned query
optimizers by up to 37%. Meanwhile, Lero continuously learns and
automatically adapts to query workloads and changes in data.
PVLDB Reference Format:
Rong Zhu, Wei Chen, Bolin Ding, Xingguang Chen, Andreas Pfadler, Ziniu
Wu, Jingren Zhou. Lero: A Learning-to-Rank Query Optimizer. PVLDB,
16(6): XXX-XXX, 2023.
doi:XX.XX/XXX.XX
# Equal contribution. ∗ Corresponding author.
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons BY-NC-ND 4.0 International
License. Visit https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ to view
a copy of this license. For any use beyond those covered by this license, obtain
permission by emailing info@vldb.org. Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
Publication rights licensed to the VLDB Endowment.
Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, Vol. 16, No. 6 ISSN 2150-8097.
doi:XX.XX/XXX.XX
PVLDB Artifact Availability:
The source code, data, and/or other artifacts have been made available at
https://github.com/Blondig/Lero-on-PostgreSQL .
1 INTRODUCTION
Query optimizer plays one of the most significant roles in databases.
It aims to select an efficient execution plan for each query. Im-
proving its performance has been a longstanding problem. Tra-
ditional cost-based query optimizers [ 40] find the plan with the
minimum estimated cost, which is a proxy of execution latency
or other user-specified metrics about resource consumption. Such
cost models contain various formulas to approximate the actual
execution latency, whose magic constant numbers are exhaus-
tively and extensively tuned based on engineering practice. Recent
works [32, 33, 51] refine traditional cost models and plan enumera-
tion algorithms with machine learning techniques. Although some
progress has been made, they still suffer from deficiencies caused
by the intrinsically difficult latency prediction problem.
In this paper, we propose Lero, a learning-to-rank query opti-
mizer which features a new lightweight pairwise machine learning
model for query optimization. Lero adopts a non-intrusive design,
with minimal modification to the existing system components in
DBMS. Instead of building from scratch,Lero is designed to leverage
decades of wisdom of query optimizers without extra, potentially
significant, cold-start learning costs.Lero can quickly improve qual-
ity of query optimization by judiciously exploring different opti-
mization opportunities and learning to rank them more accurately.
1.1 From Heuristic-Based Costing Models to
Machine Learning Models
Traditional cost-based query optimizers [40] have three major com-
ponents: cardinality estimator, cost model, and plan enumerator. For
an input query 𝑄, cardinality estimator can be invoked to estimate
the cardinality, i.e., the number of tuples in the output, for each
sub-query of 𝑄. The cost of a plan 𝑃 (with physical operators, e.g.,
merge join and hash join) for the query 𝑄 is a proxy of latency or
other user-specified metrics regarding the efficiency of executing
𝑃. The cost model PlanCost(𝑃) estimates 𝑃’s cost and is usually a
function of estimated cardinalities of𝑄’s sub-queries. The plan enu-
merator considers valid plans of 𝑄 in its search space and returns
the one with the minimum estimated cost for execution.
arXiv:2302.06873v2  [cs.DB]  20 Feb 2023

=== PAGE 2 ===
Various heuristics were essential in developing these compo-
nents. For example, independence between attributes across tables
is assumed and utilized for estimating cardinalities of joins of mul-
tiple tables [24, 45]. Magic constant numbers are prevalent in cost
models. They are often calibrated and tuned over years to ensure
that the estimated cost matches the plan’s performance well empir-
ically, under certain system and hardware configurations though.
It is realized that such heuristics are not always reliable for varying
data distributions or system configurations. As a result, cost models
may produce significant errors and the plan generated from the
traditional query optimizer may have poor quality [11, 16, 24, 45].
It is a natural idea to develop machine learning models to replace
traditional cardinality estimators, heuristic-based cost models, and
plan enumerators. For example, there are works on learning cardi-
nality estimators (refer to [16, 58] for a survey). For learning cost
models, different model parameters, instead offixed magic constant
numbers in traditional cost models, can be learned from different
datasets and workloads to enable finer-grained characterization
of various data distributions and system configurations, thus pro-
viding instance-level optimization of each query. A recent line of
works on learned query optimizers are built upon the above idea
and demonstrate some promising results [32, 33, 51].
Neo [33] and Balsa [51] provide end-to-end learned solutions for
query optimization. A plan value function PlanVal(), inspired by
the value networks in deep reinforcement learning, is learned to
replace the traditional cost model PlanCost. For a partial plan 𝑃 ′ of
the query 𝑄, the machine learning model PlanVal(𝑃 ′, 𝑄) predicts
the minimum latency of a complete plan 𝑃 that contains 𝑃 ′ as a
sub-plan, with statistics and patterns about the tables, predicates,
and joins involved in 𝑃 ′ and 𝑄 as input features. With PlanVal, Neo
and Balsa use their best-first search strategies to find the best plan
with the minimum estimated latency.
Bao [32] learns to steer a native query optimizer. It tunes the
native query optimizer with different sets of hints to generate a
number of different candidate plans for the query 𝑄. Each hint set
forces/disables some operations, e.g., index scan or hash join, so
the query optimizer may output a different, and possibly better,
execution plan. Bao uses a machine learning model PlanVal(𝑃, 𝑄)
to estimate the quality (e.g., latency) of each candidate plan 𝑃 and
select the best candidate for execution. Meanwhile, Bao periodi-
cally updates its model parameters based on execution statistics
using Thompson sampling [43], as solving a contextual multi-armed
bandits problem [56] to minimize the overall performance regret.
Although learned query optimizers exhibit superiority than tra-
ditional ones in some applications [ 37], their performance is far
from satisfactory. They still suffer from three major deficiencies:
• Unstable performance. These learned models are easily to pro-
duce inaccurate latency estimates, which leads to sub-optimal
plans. Sometimes, the performance regression is very significant.
As shown in Section 6.2, their performance could even be worse
than PostgreSQL’s native query optimizer on TPC-H benchmark.
• High learning cost. The cost of learning a query optimizer
includes both the cost of exploring and executing different query
plans and the cost of model training. Some models [33, 51] require
tens to hundreds of training iterations to coverage, and execute
all newly explored plans in each iteration. For complex datasets,
this would consume several days to even weeks.
• Slow model updating. Existing learned optimizers need to up-
date their latency prediction models to fit dynamic data, which
is very challenging especially considering that the latency of the
same plan may vary on dynamic data. Thus, model updating in
this case requires huge efforts (training data and cost), and easily
leads to performance regression, as shown in Section 6.4.
We recognize that, the deficiencies of both traditional and newly
proposed learned query optimizers stem from the notoriously diffi-
cult problem of predicting the execution latency or cost of a plan.
The exact execution latency depends on numerous factors [24, 25,
34, 39, 49], e.g., underlying data distribution, workload patterns, and
system environment. Training such a prediction model is a costly
operation, which requires collecting a large volume of training data,
by executing query plans and measuring latency statistics, and a
lengthy training process to explore the huge hypothesis space.
Moreover, cardinality and cost estimations are only partial fac-
tors for query optimization. No matter whether with the traditional
calibrated estimators/models or with the learned models trained on
previous statistics, improving the estimations’ accuracy does not
necessarily lead to improvement in query optimization.
Is it really necessary to predict the latency? We ask such a fun-
damental research question:for the purpose of query optimization, do
we really need to estimate/predict the execution latency (or any other
performance-related metric) of every possible query plan? With the
goal of finding the best execution plan, training a machine learning
model to predict the exact latency (cost) is an overkill.
1.2 A Learning-to-Rank Query Optimizer
In this paper, we introduce a learning-to-rank query optimizer,
called Lero. In essence, what we need for query optimization is
a learned oracle that is able to rank a set of candidate query plans
with respect to their execution efficiency.
Looking back, traditional cost models are essentially “human
learning” models, whose parameters, i.e., magic constant numbers,
have been tuned with decades of engineering efforts. Under the
learning-to-rank paradigm, traditional and learned cost models can
be regarded as pointwise approaches [28], which outputs an ordinal
score (i.e., estimated cost) for each plan to rank them. Lero adopts
an effective pairwise learning-to-rank approach without discarding
human wisdom in developing traditional cost models and query
optimizers. We summarize our contributions as follows.
• Lero applies learning-to-rank paradigm to query optimization.
Compared to previous proposals to learn cost models or cardi-
nalities which are partial factors for query optimization, Lero
directly ranks and learns to improve plans’ quality.Lero is more
effective in selecting plans with good quality.
• Lero adopts a pairwise approach which learns to compare two
plans and predict the better one. Compared to other pointwise
approaches, training such a binary classifier is often easier[19].
Lero has significantly lower training costs, requiring fewer train-
ing samples, and much less time to train. A pairwise comparison
model is also used for index tuning in [10]. Lero implements a
novel deep learning model which consists of a classifier over two
plan embeddings with shared parameters. The model is able to

=== PAGE 3 ===
capture the detailed structural properties for given plans and is
proven more effective in the context of query optimization.
• Lero is able to explore and learn new plan space (and new opti-
mization opportunities) more effectively. Instead of using query-
level hints as previous proposals [32], Lero can be equipped with
various strategies to adjust cardinality estimates at expression
level to effectively consider diversified plans and prioritize ex-
ploring more promising ones.
• Lero leverages decades of wisdom of databases and query op-
timization, rather than building a brand new optimizer from
scratch. Lero starts with the default behavior of the native query
optimizer and gradually learns to improve. Therefore, Lero is
guaranteed with a good initial quality and does not need a lengthy
cold-start training process.
• Lero employs a non-intrusive design. It can be implemented on
top of any existing DBMS and integrated seamlessly with the
native query optimizer. To be specific,Lero takes advantage of
public interfaces provided by most DBMSs and jointly works
with the native query optimizer to improve optimization quality.
We implementLero on PostgreSQL [2] and conduct extensive ex-
periments to evaluate its efficiency and effectiveness. Lero reduces
the execution time of the native query optimizer in PostgreSQL
by up to 70% and other learned query optimizers by up to 37%.
Experiments show that Lero adapts faster with stable performance
to various query workloads and dynamically changing data.
Organization. Section 2 outlines Lero’spairwise learning-to-rank
system architecture and key components. Section 3 presents the
design of Lero’s comparator model and describes how to train
and infer using the model. Section 4 describes how Lero explores
different plans and new optimization opportunities, for the purposes
of both plan selection and model training. Extensions are discussed
in Section 5. We report detailed evaluation results in Section 6. We
cover related work in Section 7 and conclude in Section 8.
2 SYSTEM OVERVIEW
Lero is a learning-to-rank query optimizer which continuously ex-
plores different query plans, observes their performance, andlearns
to rank them more accurately. Lero adopts a pairwise approach
whose objective is to predict which of two plans is more efficient.
Compared with other learning-to-rank approaches, e.g., pointwise
and listwise [28], Lero’s pairwise approach makes the best trade-off
between model accuracy and learning efficiency for our task.
Figure 1 shows the overall architecture of Lero. For each input
query 𝑄, the plan explorer works with the native query optimizer
to generate a number of potentially good and diversified candi-
date plans 𝑃1, 𝑃2, . . . , 𝑃𝑛. The pairwise plan comparator model
CmpPlan is then invoked to select the best plan 𝑃 ∗ from the candi-
dates for answering 𝑄. In system background, the model trainer
executes other candidate plans using idle workers whenever system
resources become available, collects the latency information into
the runtime stats repository, and continuously trains the comparator
model CmpPlan and updates it periodically. Such design enables
the comparator model to be continuously trained and become better
over time without affecting normal database services. The three
components are briefly introduced as follows.
𝑃!
Plan 
Comparator
Plan Explorer
Native 
Query 
Optimizer
Query 𝑄
…
Candidate Plans
…
… Execution 
Engine
Idle Workers
Model 
Trainer
𝑃"
𝑃#
𝑃∗
Runtime 
Stats 
Repository
Execution 
Engine
Results
Model
Update
Figure 1: System architecture of Lero.
Plan Comparator Model. Formally, let CmpPlan(𝑃1, 𝑃2) be an
oracle comparing any two plans 𝑃1 and 𝑃2 of a query:
CmpPlan(𝑃1, 𝑃2) =
(
0 if Latency(𝑃1) < Latency(𝑃2)
1 if Latency(𝑃1) > Latency(𝑃2) , (1)
with ties broken arbitrarily. We use execution latencyLatency(𝑃)
as the performance metric, but it can be easily generalized.
Our comparator model is to learn the above oracle CmpPlan.
To be more specific, we organize the training datasets (e.g. from
runtime stats repository) in the form of (𝑃𝑖, 𝑃 𝑗 , 𝑙𝑎𝑏𝑒𝑙 ) for all pairs of
executed plans of each query where 𝑙𝑎𝑏𝑒𝑙 indicates which plan in a
pair is better. The learning goal is to fit the output of the oracle in
Eq. (1). We also useCmpPlan to denote the learned plan comparator
model (or comparator for short). The design of CmpPlan, including
training and inference techniques, is described in Section 3.
Plan Explorer. For a query, the plan explorer generates a variety
of 𝑛 candidate plans 𝑃1, 𝑃2, . . . , 𝑃𝑛. While the best one chosen by
the comparator is returned by the optimizer for query execution,
the rest candidate plans are used by the model trainer to refine the
model. Therefore, the candidate plans serve the purposes of both
plan selection and model training, and they should: i) contain some
truly good candidates (although we do not have to know who they
are) and ii) be sufficiently diversified so that the model could learn
to distinguish between good and bad plans.
To satisfy the two requirements, our plan explorer uses the car-
dinality estimator as the tuning knob to generate more plans for
each query: the cardinality estimates of sub-queries are purposely
scaled up/down before being fed into the cost model for the native
query optimizer to generate different candidate plans. In particular,
it is shown that diversity can be introduced in the generated plans
by tuning selectivities (cardinalities) of predicates in a query [9, 11].
Our plan explorer is built on the intuition that the plan from the
native query optimizer is usually not too bad; by tuning cardinality
estimates, it may either generate some better plans in the neigh-
boring plan space (if tuning towards the true cost of a sub-query
which was incorrectly estimated), or some worse plans (tuning in
the opposite direction). Plans with various quality also increase the
diversity among candidates to train the comparator, and it is the
comparator’s job to identify the best among them.
Details about our plan exploration strategy are described in
Section 4. One obvious advantage of our plan explorer is that the
cardinality estimator is an essential component in almost all query
optimizers, and thus the strategy and the implementation of our
plan explorer can be easily migrated to different databases.

=== PAGE 4 ===
Model Trainer. For each query, the trainer executes other candi-
date plans generated by the plan explorer, whenever system re-
sources become available, and adds their plan information and
execution statistics into the runtime stats repository. Such infor-
mation is further used for training and updating the comparator
model CmpPlan. By doing so, Lero is able to explore new plan
space as much as possible and learn from its potential mistakes.
In real-world distributed systems, idle workers and computation
resources commonly exist due to scheduling [20] or synchroniza-
tion [6]. Some platforms [4, 37] provide an individual environment
for performance testing, which can be also used as a resource for
executing candidate plans and collecting runtime stats.
3 A LEARNED PLAN COMPARATOR
The comparatorCmpPlan is trained/updated to fit a training dataset
from the runtime stats repository which continuously monitors
query execution and collects execution information.
3.1 Model Design
The overall model architecture of our comparatorCmpPlan(𝑃1, 𝑃2)
is shown in Figure 2. It consists ofplan embedding layers followed by
a comparison layer. The plan embedding layer is carefully designed
to effectively capture all the crucial information about a query plan,
including tables, operators, and plan structural properties, etc., and
the comparison layer comparesembeddings (1-𝑑𝑖𝑚 or 𝑑-𝑑𝑖𝑚 vectors
output by the embedding layers) from the two plans and calculates
their difference in terms of plan quality for the comparison purpose.
Plan Embedding Layers. The plan embedding layers of CmpPlan
map 𝑃1 and 𝑃2 from the original feature space to a one-dimensional
(1-𝑑𝑖𝑚) embedding space, in order to learn differences between plans.
A sub-model PlanEmb takes features from each plan and generate
its plan embedding, PlanEmb(𝑃𝑖 ) ∈ R for each plan 𝑃𝑖 (𝑖 = 1, 2). We
use the parameter sharing technique in machine learning: the two
plan embeddings, PlanEmb(𝑃1) and PlanEmb(𝑃2), are generated
by two copies of PlanEmb, which are two components in CmpPlan
sharing the same model structure and learnable parameters.
Judicious design of embedding model to capture critical infor-
mation in the tree-structured plan is crucial for the overall model’s
effectiveness and efficiency.Lero builds on top of the tree convolu-
tion model, similar to [32, 33, 36] but with significant improvements.
As in Figure 2, a plan 𝑃 is featurized as a tree structure of vectors.
The vector for each sub-plan 𝑃 𝑗 that answers sub-query 𝑄 𝑗 (cor-
responding to a tree node) concatenates: a one-hot encoding of
the last operation on 𝑃 𝑗 , the cardinality estimate, the row width
of 𝑄 𝑗 ’s output, and 0/1 encoding of tables touched by𝑄 𝑗 . As the
cardinality C(𝑄 𝑗 ) spans in a wide range, we use a min-max nor-
malization over log(C(𝑄 𝑗 )) in the feature vector. Unlike previous
approaches [32, 33], the vector does not include the estimated cost,
as it is strongly correlated with the estimated cardinality and row
width and it may introduce additional inaccuracy of the cost model.
The tree convolution operation slides multiple triangle shaped
filters over each node and its two children to transform the plan
into another tree. Finally, vectors on the tree nodes are flattened to
be fed into a neural network to generate the plan embedding.
It is worth noting that previous works use machine learning
models to predict latency. Our embedding model PlanEmb and
comparator CmpPlan are trained and used differently. Instead of
predicting plan latency, PlanEmb tries to extract key information
from plans and enables thecomparison layer of CmpPlan to compare
two plans. The learned 1-𝑑𝑖𝑚 plan embedding can be interpreted as
a ranking criteria, and all pairs of plans for a query are comparable
based on PlanEmb(·). Thus, the scale ofPlanEmb(𝑃) for a plan 𝑃 is
not restricted, and its value does not have to be proportional to (or
approximate) 𝑃’s performance metric, e.g., latency. Such flexibility
allows the overall model to be more effective and easier to train.
Comparison Layer. The plan embedding model PlanEmb(·) is
learned together with CmpPlan via pairwise comparisons of plans,
with binary labels indicating which one is better for each pair.
Thus, in the comparison layer of CmpPlan, we feed the difference
𝑥 = PlanEmb(𝑃1) − PlanEmb(𝑃2) of embeddings of two plans into
a logistic activation function 𝜙 (𝑥) = (1 + exp(−𝑥)) −1 to generate
the model’s final output(indicating whether 𝑃1 or 𝑃2 is better):
CmpPlan(𝑃1, 𝑃2) = 𝜙 (PlanEmb(𝑃1) − PlanEmb(𝑃2)), (2)
which is within (0, 1) and can be interpreted as how likely 𝑃2 is
more preferable than 𝑃1. This is consistent with the learning goal
of our comparator model as in Eq. (1): 𝑃1 is more preferable if
CmpPlan(𝑃2, 𝑃1) < 0.5 or approaches to 0, and 𝑃2 is more prefer-
able if CmpPlan(𝑃2, 𝑃1) > 0.5 or approaches to 1. Equivalently, a
smaller 1-𝑑𝑖𝑚 plan embedding is more preferable. More formally,
CmpPlan(𝑃1, 𝑃2) →

0 if PlanEmb(𝑃1, 𝑄) ≪ PlanEmb(𝑃2, 𝑄)
1 if PlanEmb(𝑃1, 𝑄) ≫ PlanEmb(𝑃2, 𝑄) .
From how the model’s output is derived in (2) and the fact
that 𝜙 (𝑎 − 𝑏) + 𝜙 (𝑏 − 𝑎) = 1, our comparator model preserves
two nice properties: i) ( commutativity) CmpPlan(𝑃1, 𝑃2) = 1 −
CmpPlan(𝑃2, 𝑃1), that is, exchanging the order of input plans does
not affect the comparison result; ii) (transitivity): CmpPlan(𝑃1, 𝑃2) <
0.5 and CmpPlan(𝑃2, 𝑃3) < 0.5 ⇒ CmpPlan(𝑃1, 𝑃3) < 0.5, that is,
𝑃1 is better than 𝑃2 and 𝑃2 is better than 𝑃3 imply that 𝑃1 is better
than 𝑃3. Thus, the comparatorCmpPlan(·, ·)induces a total order of
all plans, and we could select𝑃 ∗ = arg min𝑃1...𝑃𝑛 PlanEmb(𝑃𝑖 ) with
the minimum value of PlanEmb(·) as the best plan for execution.
Loss Function. The goal ofCmpPlan is to maximize the likelihood
of outputting the right order between any two plans, so that the
best plan can be selected. Thus, the loss function of CmpPlan is
designed towards this goal. Conceptually, let A be a (randomized)
algorithm that decides which one of 𝑃1 and 𝑃2 is more preferable
based on the model’s outputCmpPlan(𝑃1, 𝑃2) ∈ ( 0, 1):
A (𝑃1, 𝑃2) →
(
𝑃1 with probability 1 − CmpPlan(𝑃1, 𝑃2)
𝑃2 with probability CmpPlan(𝑃1, 𝑃2) . (3)
We have CmpPlan(𝑃1, 𝑃2) + CmpPlan(𝑃2, 𝑃1) = 1 by the com-
mutativity. Thus, the algorithm A is well-defined: A (𝑃1, 𝑃2) and
A (𝑃2, 𝑃1) output 𝑃1 with the same probability. Let 𝑃1 ≺ 𝑃2 denote
the event that Latency(𝑃1) < Latency(𝑃2) and 𝑃1 ≻ 𝑃2 vice versa.
The goal is to train CmpPlan such that A is as accurate as possible.
Suppose we have a workload of queries in W = {𝑄 } and a set of
candidate plans 𝑃 (𝑄) = {𝑃1, . . . , 𝑃𝑛 } for each query, as the training
data. We use A to compare all pairs of candidate plans for each
𝑄 ∈ W ; the probability that A makes no mistake is:

=== PAGE 5 ===
PlanEmb(𝑃!) 
−
𝜙⋅256 channels 128 channels 64 channels
Pooling Layer
Fully Connected
Fully Connected
1 ×641 ×321 ×1Tree Convolution
PlanEmbSub-Model
Comparator Model CmpPlanIndex ScanMerge Join
HashJoin
Table C
Index Scan
Table B
Seq Scan
Table A
Index ScanMerge Join
LoopJoin
Table A
Index Scan
Table C
Seq Scan
Table B
Plan 𝑃!
Plan 𝑃"
PlanEmb(𝑃") 
Merge JoinHash JoinLoop Join
[ 1,   0,   0,   0,   0,   0,   0.12,   4,   1,   1,   0 ]
Index ScanSeq ScanAggregateCardinalityRow WidthTable ATable BTable C
(0,  1)
Latency(𝑃!) >Latency(𝑃") 
Latency(𝑃!) <Latency(𝑃") 
Comparison LayerPlan Embedding Layers (d = 1)Plan encoding on each node
[ 0,   0,   0,   1,   0,   0,   0.23,   3,   1,   0,   0 ]
Figure 2: Plan encoding and the structure of our plan comparator model ( 𝑑 = 1).
ACC(A, W) =
Ö
𝑄 ∈W
©­
«
Ö
𝑃𝑖 ≺𝑃 𝑗 ∈𝑃 (𝑄)
(1 − CmpPlan(𝑃𝑖, 𝑃𝑗 )) (4)
·
Ö
𝑃𝑖 ≻𝑃 𝑗 ∈𝑃 (𝑄)
CmpPlan(𝑃𝑖, 𝑃𝑗 )ª®
¬
.
We train CmpPlan to fit the observed orders of plans for queries in
W, so the loss function is chosen to be 𝐿 = − log ACC(A, W):
𝐿 = −
∑︁
𝑄 ∈W
∑︁
𝑃𝑖,𝑃 𝑗 ∈𝑃 (𝑄)

I𝑃𝑖 ≺𝑃 𝑗 ·log(1 − CmpPlan(𝑃𝑖, 𝑃𝑗 )) (5)
+I𝑃𝑖 ≻𝑃 𝑗 ·log(CmpPlan(𝑃𝑖, 𝑃𝑗 ))

,
where the indicator functionIx returns 1 if the conditionx holds and
0 otherwise. 𝐿 coincides with the cross-entropy loss in classification.
3.2 Model Training
Instead of training from scratch, we pre-train our comparator model
CmpPlan offline first on synthetic workloads to inherit the wisdom
of the native query optimizer and its cost model. It is then continu-
ously trained and updated online on real workloads with training
data collected during actual executions of query plans.
Model Pre-training: Starting from Traditional Wisdom. To
leverage decades of wisdom of cost models developed in DBMSs,
we pre-train the comparator model using the estimated costs of
candidate plans (without executing them) generated from a sample
workload of queries in an offline training stage. After pre-training,
the 1-𝑑𝑖𝑚 embedding PlanEmb(𝑃) is expected to be an approxima-
tion to the native estimated cost PlanCost(𝑃). Thus, the model is
bootstrapped to perform similarly to the native query optimizer at
the beginning. As more and more queries are executed, CmpPlan
is continuously improved and tuned to adapt to possibly dynamic
data distribution and workloads that drift over time.
In the native cost model, the cost of a plan is usually a piecewise
linear or quadratic function of estimated cardinalities of sub-queries
with magic constants as co-coefficients for different operators. The
goal of pre-trainingPlanEmb(𝑃) is to learn such functions in a data-
agnostic way, so as to handle any unseen query. Thus, we could
pre-train PlanEmb(𝑃) purely using synthetic workloads. Namely,
we randomly generate a number of plans with different join orders
and predicates on different tables, and featurize them as the training
data; we also randomly set the cardinality for each sub-plan of each
plan and feed them into the native cost model (without executing
the plans) to derive the estimated plan costs as labels. As the cost
models are often in a class of functions with simple structures, the
model pre-training converges very fast.
Pairwise Training. In the online stage, we train and update the
comparator CmpPlan in the pairwise comparison framework. For
each query 𝑄, its candidate plans {𝑃1, . . . , 𝑃𝑛 } are generated by
the plan explorer to be introduced in Section 4; these plans are
executed by idle workers, whenever system resources become
available, with execution statistics collected in the runtime stats
repository. According to the loss function in Eq. (5), we construct
𝑛(𝑛 − 1) training data points for each query: for each pair(𝑖, 𝑗 ) with
1 ≤ 𝑖 ≠ 𝑗 ≤ 𝑛, we construct a data point with features (𝑃𝑖, 𝑃𝑗 ) and
label 1 if Latency(𝑃𝑖 ) > Latency(𝑃 𝑗 ), and 0 otherwise.
Periodically, we use an SGD optimizer to update CmpPlan to-
gether with PlanEmb by backward propagation with the train-
ing dataset constructed above. For parameters in the sub-model
PlanEmb, as they are shared in two copies of PlanEmb that output
PlanEmb(𝑃𝑖 ) and PlanEmb(𝑃 𝑗 ), respectively, we add up the gradi-
ents from the two copies for each shared parameter together to
update this parameter in the model PlanEmb.
Our comparator, by nature of its design, adapts fast to dynami-
cally changing data during the processing of model training and
updating. When tuples are inserted or deleted into the database, the
relative orders of two plans (i.e., labels ofCmpPlan) are more robust
than their execution latencies (i.e., labels of a latency prediction
model). The latter would vary for the same plan even when tuples
from the same distribution are inserted, which makes the training
of a latency prediction model costly especially on dynamic data.
Our experimental study in Section 6.4 verifies the above intuition.
4 PLAN EXPLORATION STRATEGY
The plan explorer of Lero generates a list of candidate plans𝑃1, . . . ,
𝑃𝑛 for a query 𝑄, for two purposes. First, for the purpose of query
optimization, Lero applies the comparator model to identify the best
plan among the candidates for execution. Thus the candidate list
must include some truly good plans for consideration.
Second, for the purpose of plan exploration, Lero prioritizes ex-
ploring other promising plans for the query. By executing them
and comparing their performance pairwise, Lero is able to catch
past optimization mistakes and adjust the model timely using the
newly observed runtime information. In addition, whenever system
resources are available, other candidate plans which are diversified
sufficiently (e.g., with different join orders or in different shapes
such as left-deep and bushy trees) are also considered so that Lero
learns new plan space and improves the model over time.
For the ease of deployment, Lero makes minimal changes to
the native query optimizer. Therefore, the plan explorer should
be able to be implemented in a lightweight way, e.g., through re-
implementing some system provided interfaces. Meanwhile, we

=== PAGE 6 ===
hope that the framework of Lero could be generally used in any
DBMS; thus, the strategy should not be system-specific.
Existing Plan Exploration Methods. A straightforward strategy
is to explore a random sample of valid plans for each query, which is
used by reinforcement learning-based approaches such as Neo [33]
and Balsa [51]. The obvious drawback is that, with high likelihood,
high-quality plans could be missing in a random sample; otherwise,
the sample size has to be so large that executing these sample plans
would be too costly for model training.
Bao [32] explores plans by tuning a set of hints (boolean flags) to
disable/force certain types of optimization rules. For example, the
native query optimizer initially generates a plan with merge join
for a query; with a hint set that disables merge join and forces in-
dexed nested loop join, it would generate a different candidate plan.
However, this optimizer-level tuning strategy has two drawbacks.
First, a hint set is typically applied for the whole query during
the entire plan search procedure. If different parts of a query have
different optimal choices, tuning a flag at a query level may miss
opportunities for finding high-quality plans. For example, let 𝑄
be a query joining two sub-queries 𝑄1 and 𝑄2 where the best join
operations for 𝑄1 and 𝑄2 are indexed nested loop join and merge
join, respectively. The query optimizer may use merge join for both
𝑄1 and 𝑄2 due to cardinality estimation errors. With a hint set
disabling/forcing either merge join or indexed nested loop join, at
most one of 𝑄1 and 𝑄2 could select the right operation. In such
cases, the optimal plan can never be included in the candidate list.
Second, the set of available hints is system specific. An optimizer
usually contains hundreds of flags to enable/disable certain opti-
mization rules. Enumerating all kinds of combinations is infeasible
in practice. Selecting an effective subset of hint sets manually re-
quires a deep understanding on the system and comprehensive
analysis on the workload [37].
Thus, it motivates us to pursue other routes for designing a plan
exploration strategy. We introduce our tuning knob in Section 4.1,
followed with practical heuristic strategies in Section 4.2.
4.1 Cardinality as Knob for Plan Explorer
Lero uses the cardinality estimator as the tuning knob for our plan
explorer. In the native cost-based query optimizer, the estimated
cardinality for each sub-query of an input query 𝑄 is fed into the
cost model to guide plan enumeration and selection. Each time
with different cardinality estimates on one or more sub-queries, the
query optimizer would select a different plan for 𝑄. In Lero’s plan
explorer, we tune (magnify or reduce) the estimated cardinalities
multiple times to generate a list of different candidate plans.
Formally, let C() be the native cardinality estimator in DBMS.
For each sub-query 𝑄 ′ of a query 𝑄, C(𝑄 ′) gives a cardinality
estimate. Instead of invokingC() in the cost model, we ask the query
optimizer to invoke a tuned estimator eC(), so it would generate a
different plan. Our plan explorer would tune C() in different ways;
with different tuned estimators fed into the cost model, the query
optimizer generates different plans as the candidates 𝑃1, . . . , 𝑃𝑛.
Using the cardinality estimator as a tuning knob has following
advantages. First, in cost-based query optimizers, cardinality esti-
mates decide the estimated costs, and thus determine join orders
and physical operations on tables and sub-queries. Therefore, under
the same resource budget (e.g. work memory) for plan execution,
tuning cardinality estimates would be highly possible to introduce
diversity in candidate plans, possibly with different join orders or
different operators (e.g., sort-merge join v.s. nested loop join). Sec-
ond, cardinality tuning is platform-independent. For most DBMSs,
there exist system-provided interfaces to modify the estimated
cardinality, which is friendly for system deployment.
A Brute-Force Exploration Strategy. Let C∗ () be the true car-
dinality. For any query 𝑄, the difference between C∗ (𝑄) and the
DBMS’s estimateC(𝑄) is unknown. However, with a reasonable
number of different ways to tune C(𝑄), we can ensure that at least
one tuned estimator eC(𝑄) is close to C∗ (𝑄), in terms of q-error,
which is defined as QE(estimate, true) = max{ estimate
true , true
estimate }.
We tune the cardinality estimatorC() with exponentially varying
step sizes. Suppose we know an upper bound of the q-error of C(),
namely, QE(C(𝑄 ′), C∗ (𝑄 ′)) ≤ Δ for any sub-query 𝑄 ′ of 𝑄. Let
𝐹 Δ
𝛼 = {𝛼𝑡 | ⌊− log𝛼 Δ⌋ ≤ 𝑡 ≤ ⌈ log𝛼 Δ⌉, 𝑡 ∈ Z} (6)
be the set of guesses of scaling factors . For each 𝑓 = 𝛼𝑡 ∈ 𝐹 Δ𝛼 , we
tune C(𝑄 ′) as eC(𝑄 ′) = 𝑓 ·C(𝑄 ′). Then there is at least one 𝑓 ∈ 𝐹 Δ𝛼
such that QE(𝑓 · C(𝑄 ′), C∗ (𝑄 ′)) ≤ 𝛼. The estimation of Δ does
not need to be tight, since the number of guesses |𝐹 Δ𝛼 | = Θ(log𝛼 Δ)
depends logarithmically on Δ. In practice, it can be set based on
users’ experience or q-error distribution on historical queries.
In order to explore plans for the query 𝑄, we repeat the above
tuning process recursively for all of its sub-queries: for each sub-
query 𝑄 ′ of 𝑄, we pick a scaling factor 𝑓𝑄′ ∈ 𝐹 Δ𝛼 and set eC(𝑄 ′) =
𝑓𝑄′ ·C(𝑄 ′). For each combination of scaling factors ⟨𝑓𝑄′ ⟩𝑄′ ⊆𝑄, we
construct an estimator eC() defined for all the sub-queries of 𝑄, and
we can feed it into the cost model to generate a candidate plan.
From the way how tuned estimators are constructed above, there
is at least one combination of scaling factors such that the result-
ing eC() satisfies QE(eC(𝑄 ′), C∗ (𝑄 ′)) ≤ 𝛼 for all sub-queries of 𝑄.
Theoretically, a near-optimal candidate plan under a specific cost
model can be generated by the optimizer using an estimator eC()
with q-error bounded by 𝛼; more formally, from [35], with some
mild assumptions about the cost model, the optimal plan undereC()
is no worse than the optimal plan under C∗ () by a factor of 𝛼 4.
Ensuring that at least one candidate plan is near-optimal suffices
for the purpose of optimization, as it is the comparator’s job to
identify it among all candidates. However, the overhead of the above
method is too high: the number of different sub-queries𝑄 ′ is at least
2𝑞 where 𝑞 is the number of tables in𝑄, and |𝐹 Δ𝛼 | = Θ(log𝛼 Δ); thus,
the total number of combinations of scaling factors is Θ(log2𝑞
𝛼 Δ).
From the above discussion, we can prove the following results.
Proposition 1. In the above brute-force exploration strategy, the
number of candidate plans generated is at most O(log2𝑞
𝛼 Δ); with
some mild assumptions about the cost model as in [ 35], at least one of
them is no worse than the optimal plan by a factor of 𝛼 4.
The list of candidate plans generated in the above way is too
long, which is unbearably costly for model training. We propose
more effective heuristic methods in the following subsection.

=== PAGE 7 ===
Algorithm plan_explorer(𝑄, 𝛼, Δ)
1: Priority queue candidate_plans ← ∅
2: for each 𝑓 ∈ 𝐹 Δ𝛼 in the increasing order of | log 𝑓 | do
3: for 𝑘 ← 1 to 𝑞 (the number of tables in 𝑄) do
4: Inside query optimizer: let C() be the default cardinality esti-
mator in native query optimizer
5: eC(𝑄′) ← 𝑓 ·C(𝑄′) for size-𝑘 sub-queries 𝑄′ ∈ sub𝑘 (𝑄)
6: eC(𝑄′) ← C(𝑄′) for sub-queries 𝑄′ ∈ sub(𝑄) − sub𝑘 (𝑄)
7: feed cardinality eC() into the cost model to generate a plan 𝑃
8: candidate_plans ← candidate_plans ∪ { 𝑃 }
9: return candidate_plans
Figure 3: Plan exploration strategy in Lero.
4.2 Priority-Based Heuristic Methods
Plan exploration is conducted in background whenever system
resources become available. The key idea of our heuristics is to
prioritize exploring where the native optimizer is likely to make
mistakes. In addition, instead of exploring all possibilities and tun-
ing cardinality estimates for all sub-queries simultaneously as in
the brute-force strategy, we introduce a heuristic which focuses
on mistakes in estimating cardinalities for size-𝑘 sub-queries on 𝑘
tables (for each different 𝑘 ≥ 1 at one time). 1
The necessity of considering 𝑘 > 1 is because the difficulty (as
well as the error) of estimating cardinality of size- 𝑘 sub-queries
increases significantly as 𝑘 increases (due to cross-table correlation
among columns). Thus, the native optimizer tends to make mistakes
in generating partial plans for sub-queries on a larger number𝑘 > 1
of tables. As a trade-off between efficiency and effectiveness, the
following strategy tries to guess where the biggest mistake is (by
enumerating all possible values of𝑘), and tune cardinality estimates
for all size-𝑘 sub-queries together.
The plan explorer in Lero is illustrated in Figure 3. In the outer
loop (line 2), we enumerate a scaling factor𝑓 ∈ 𝐹 Δ𝛼 , in the increasing
order of | log 𝑓 | with ties broken arbitrarily. That is, we prioritize
exploring the neighboring plan space surrounding the native opti-
mizer’s choice (with𝑓 closer to 1), where plan quality is not too bad
and the optimizer is likely to make mistakes, if any. Letsub𝑘 (𝑄) be
the set of size-𝑘 sub-queries of a query 𝑄 on 𝑞 tables. An extensive
experimental study in [24] shows that sub-queries with the same
size are often underestimated together with similar q-errors. Thus,
in the inner loop, we enumerate𝑘 and tune the cardinality estimates
for all sub-queries 𝑄 ′ ∈ sub𝑘 (𝑄) together, resulting in a tuned es-
timator eC (lines 5-6) to be fed into the optimizer. The resulting
candidate plans are maintained in a priority queue for evaluation
and execution whenever system resources allow. Considering the
sizes of the two loops in lines 2-3, the following result is obvious.
Proposition 2. In the heuristic strategy in Figure 3, the number
of candidate plans generated is at most O(𝑞 ·log𝛼 Δ).
Encouraging Diversity in Candidates. An important goal of our
plan explorer is to generate diversified candidates. In Figure 4, we
give conceptual examples of typical cases when our plan explorer
encourages diversity in the candidates (with different plan shapes
and join orders), for a query joining four tables, 𝐴 ⊲ ⊳𝐵 ⊲ ⊳𝐶 ⊲ ⊳𝐷:
1We also consider heuristics based on plan diagram [ 9, 11], which can be found in
Appendix B.
⋈
𝐴 𝐶
⋈
𝐵
𝐷
⋈
𝑃!
⋈
𝐴 𝐵
⋈
⋈
𝐶 𝐷
𝑃"
⋈
𝐴 𝐵
⋈
𝐶
𝐷
⋈𝑃#
⋈
𝐶 𝐷
⋈
𝐴
𝐵
⋈𝑃$
Figure 4: Intuitions on why our plan explorer based on sub-
query grouping encourages diversity.
(Diversity of plan shapes) Two valid plans𝑃1 and 𝑃2 have different
shapes (left-deep tree and bushy tree, respectively). When we tune
cardinality estimates for size-2 sub-queries ( 𝑘 = 2 in line 2 of
Figure 3), different values of 𝑓 would encourage different plan
shapes. Namely, when 𝑓 ≪ 1, two sub-queries 𝐴 ⊲ ⊳𝐵 and 𝐶 ⊲ ⊳𝐷
in 𝑃2 have reduced cardinality estimates in eC(), while only one
sub-query 𝐴 ⊲ ⊳𝐶 in 𝑃1 has a reduced cardinality estimate. As a
result, the estimated cost of 𝑃2 is reduced more than that of 𝑃1, and
thus a bushy tree is more likely to be generated by our plan explorer
and included in the candidate list. When𝑓 ≫ 1, with a similar logic,
a left-deep tree is more likely to appear in the candidate list.
(Diversity of join orders ) Plans 𝑃3 and 𝑃4 are both left-deep trees
but have different join orders. In Figure 4, the length of bar on each
single and joined table represents its size. 𝑃3 first executes 𝐴 ⊲ ⊳𝐵
which has a large estimated cardinality, while 𝑃4 first executes 𝐶 ⊲ ⊳
𝐷 which is estimated to be much smaller. When we tune cardinality
estimates for size-2 sub-queries, we multiply both estimates with a
scaling factor 𝑓 . Suppose 𝑃3 and 𝑃4 have similar total estimated cost
before tuning. When 𝑓 ≪ 1, the decrease of the tuned cardinality
estimate eC(𝐴 ⊲ ⊳𝐵) − C(𝐴 ⊲ ⊳𝐵) for 𝐴 ⊲ ⊳𝐵 is more significant than
eC(𝐶 ⊲ ⊳𝐷) − C(𝐶 ⊲ ⊳𝐷), and thus 𝑃3 is more likely to be in the
candidate list; when 𝑓 ≫ 1, the increase eC(𝐴 ⊲ ⊳𝐵) − C(𝐴 ⊲ ⊳𝐵) is
more significant, and thus 𝑃4 is more preferable.
Some Implementation Details. The tuned estimator eC() in our
plan explorer (in Figure 3) is not constructed explicitly by setting
the cardinality estimate for every possible sub-query 𝑄 ′ of 𝑄 (as in
lines 5-6). Instead, we only need a “hook” to the native cardinality
estimator C(): if the size of a sub-query 𝑄 ′ is 𝑘, we invoke C(𝑄 ′)
and return 𝑓 · C(𝑄 ′) as eC(𝑄 ′); otherwise, we just return C(𝑄 ′).
We implement Lero on PostgreSQL. Thanks to Lero’s non-intrusive
design, the implementation is straightforward. The only major
modification to PostgreSQL is a hook function pg_hint_plan that
implements the tuned cardinality estimator eC() in the above way.
Our implementation on PostgreSQL can be easily ported to other
databases that offer similar interfaces for cardinality estimators.
5 EXTENSIONS AND DISCUSSION
Comparator with 𝑑-𝑑𝑖𝑚 Embedding. Our comparator CmpPlan
could be extended to a𝑑-dimensional (𝑑-𝑑𝑖𝑚) embedding space. We
only need to leave the dimensionality of the last plan embedding
layer (in Figure 2) as𝑑 > 1, with the hope to summarize more sophis-
ticated statistical and structural information about each plan in plan
embeddings. After that, the comparison layer is a learnable linear
layer that compares the two𝑑-𝑑𝑖𝑚 embeddings PlanEmb(𝑃1) ∈ R𝑑

=== PAGE 8 ===
and PlanEmb(𝑃2) ∈ R𝑑, and outputs 0 (𝑃1 is better) or 1 (𝑃2 is
better). We defer detailed analysis to Appendix A.
How to Handle Varying Resource Budget. Traditionally, each
query is assigned a resource budget (e.g. work memory) under
which the query is optimized and later executed. It is the database
engine’s responsibility to guarantee each query receives its assigned
budget at runtime and ensure performance isolation among differ-
ent queries to avoid any resource contention. This is an orthogonal
task to query optimization. When resource condition in the data-
base engine changes dramatically and the assigned budget for a
query can no longer be guaranteed at runtime, re-optimization for
the query under a different budget might be triggered.
We assume constant resource budget per plan execution in this
paper. In principle, Lero can include resource budget information
into the feature set of our comparator model, namely, as inputs to
the plan embedding layers. In this way, the resulting plan embed-
dings encode such information about available resource, and plans
can be compared in the comparison layer under different resource
budgets at runtime. This augmented design will bring more chal-
lenges in model training, as the comparator now needs to observe
runtime stats under various resource budgets to be fully trained,
which we leave for future work.
6 EXPERIMENTAL EV ALUATION
We make our implementation of Lero open-source [2]. We also im-
plement recently proposed learned query optimizers, Neo [33] and
Bao [32], and use Balsa’s open-source implementation in [1, 51] on
PostgreSQL. We describe our experimental setup in Section 6.1. We
first answer the most crucial questions about Lero’s performance:
• How much improvement on query execution performance could
Lero achieve in comparison with PostgreSQL’s native and other
learned query optimizers? (Sections 6.2 and 6.8)
• How much is Lero’s query optimization cost? (Section 6.3)
• Could Lero adapt to workloads on dynamic data? (Section 6.4)
We then examine the design choices and settings in Lero and
understand how they affect the performance of Lero:
• What are the benefits of using pre-training in Lero? (Section 6.5)
• Is the proposed plan exploration strategy efficient and effective?
How is it compared with alternative strategies? (Section 6.6)
• With less or limited idle resource, could Lero still achieve similar
performance gains? (Section 6.7)
6.1 Experimental Setup
Benchmarks. We evaluate all the query optimizers on three widely
used benchmarks.
• The IMDB dataset has 21 tables on movies and actors, and its
JOB workload [24] has 113 realistic queries. For large-scale eval-
uation in most of our experiments, we generate a workload of
1,000 queries from JOB (similar to the one in [ 32]): each time
we randomly sample a query template from JOB, fetch its join
template and attach some randomly generated predicates to it.
• The STATS dataset and STATS-CEB workload [ 15, 16] are re-
cently proposed to evaluate the end-to-end performance of query
optimizer. STATS contains8 tables of user-contributed content
on the Stats Stack Exchange network. Its data distribution is more
complex than IMDB. STATS-CEB contains 146 query templates
varying in join sizes and types. We generate a query workload
using the same approach as described above.
• The TPC-H [8] has its data synthetically generated under a uni-
form distribution. We set the scale factor to 10, and use its query
templates #3, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10 for workload generation. Under each
template, we generate a number of queries with varying predi-
cates. We exclude other templates which are either too simple
(on only one or two tables), or with views or nested SQL queries.
Queries with views or nested SQL queries cannot be fully opti-
mized by Lero due to a limitation of our implementation: to tune
cardinality estimations for operators in the plans, we modify the
hook function pg_hint_plan, which does not support to impose
any hints on views and nested SQL queries. We would try to fix
this limitation in the future implementation.
• The TPC-DS [7] is another benchmark for evaluating database
performance. Similar to TPC-H, we also set its scale factor to 10
and exclude all templates that are either too simple or can not be
supported by the pg_hint_plan hook function. The remaining 23
templates are used to generate a query workload with various
predicates in a similar way to TPC-H.
Learned Optimizers in Comparison. Neo and Balsa need to find
a plan to execute using their latest model in each training epoch,
and use the execution statistics to update the model. The generated
plans are unknown before each epoch, so the training can only be
done sequentially, which leads to a very long training time even
with unlimited resource. By their evaluation [33, 51], the models
converge after tens of epochs. On the contrary, both Bao and Lero
can simultaneously run the selected plans and collect the training
data in background, which greatly expedite the training process.
In our experiments, neither Neo nor Balsa could match the per-
formance of PostgreSQL’s native query optimizer after training for
72 hours on all of our datasets, except the original JOB workload
(with 113 queries) on the IMDB dataset. On the contrary, Bao often
outperforms PostgreSQL after training for several hours. Thus, we
only report performance of Bao and Lero in most of our experi-
ments in Sections 6.2-6.7. We compare Lero with Balsa on IMDB
with the original JOB workload in Section 6.8. Bao and Balsa have
demonstrated their superiority over Neo in [32, 51], so we do not
further compare with it in the rest experiments.
As described in [32], Bao selects one candidate plan by Thomp-
son sampling to execute and collects its execution time to update
its model periodically. To have a fair comparison with Lero, we
also implement an extended version of Bao, called Bao+, which
witnesses more plans for model training. For each training query,
it runs all candidate plans generated by its hint set tuning strategy
using idle computation resource and collects their execution time
to update the model periodically, in a similar way to Lero.
Evaluation Scenarios We compareLero with PostgreSQL’s native
query optimizer and other learned optimizers in different settings.
PostgreSQL’s native query optimizer does not need a separate train-
ing phase. For fair comparisons with the native and learned opti-
mizers, we use the “time series split” strategy [32] for training and

=== PAGE 9 ===
Execution Time (in hour)Query Optimizer STATS IMDB TPC-H TPC-DS
PostgreSQL 20.19 1.15 0.94 1.68
Bao 15.32 0.47 1.17 1.55
Bao+ 13.85 0.41 0.89 1.57
Lero 11.32 0.35 0.74 1.47
Fastest Found Plan 10.73 0.19 0.72 1.39
Table 1: Overall performance of different query optimizers.
evaluating Bao, Bao+, and Lero. Namely, unique queries in a work-
load are randomly shuffled as 𝑄1, 𝑄2, . . .. The learned optimizers
are always evaluated on queries that have never seen during the
procedure of model training and updating. In the experiments, we
evaluate their performance under two realistic scenarios:
• Performance curve since deployment. The learned optimizers are
continuously updated since deployed for each workload. Bao+
and Lero may execute multiple candidate plans for a query on
idle workers. When 𝑄𝑡 +1 is evaluated, all learned optimizers are
only trained with information from earlier queries 𝑄1, . . . , 𝑄𝑡 .
Their models are updated in the background every 100 queries
on IMDB and STATS, every 30 queries on TPC-H and every 50
queries on TPC-DS. By reporting the (accumulated) latency on
each 𝑄𝑡 +1, we meter the performance of different optimizers since
the deployment and how quickly they adapt to a new workload.
• Performance with stable models. The learned optimizers tend to be
stable (that is, the model training process converges) after seeing
a sufficient number of queries in the workload, i.e., 𝑄1, . . . , 𝑄𝑇
(training queries), then we would use the optimizers to evaluate
queries 𝑄𝑇 +1, 𝑄𝑇 +2, . . . (test queries) without further updating
the models. The numbers of test queries on IMDB, STATS, TPC-H
and TPC-DS are 113, 146, 30 and 115, respectively. By reporting
their (average) performance on 𝑄𝑇 +1, 𝑄𝑇 +2, . . ., we compare the
performance of learned optimizers after they are deployed on a
workload and stabilized for a while.
Setup. We deploy learned optimizers on a Linux machine with
an Intel(R) Xeon(R) Platinum 8163 CPU running at 2.5 GHz, 96
cores, 512GB DDR4 RAM and 1TB SSD. It is also equipped with
one NVIDIA RTX-2080TI GPU for model training and inference.
PostgreSQL 13.1 is installed and configured with 4GB shared buffers.
6.2 Query Performance
We compare Lero with other optimizers for the two scenarios in
Section 6.1. For the hyper-parameters ofLero, we set the cardinality
tuning factor 𝛼 = 10 and q-error upper bound Δ = 102, so the set
of scaling factors is 𝐹 Δ𝛼 = {10−2, 10−1, 1, 10, 102}. For Bao and Bao+,
we use the same family of 48 hint sets [ 30] for plan generation.
As in Bao’s original implementation [31], Bao and Bao+ select the
same plan as PostgreSQL’s optimizer for the first 100 queries while
their machine learning models are trained and warmed up.
6.2.1 Performance with Stable Models. We first compare the perfor-
mance of different optimizers, after Bao, Bao+, and Lero have been
deployed for a while and the model training converges after seeing
all training queries. We will then use the learned optimizers to
process the unseen test queries. Table 1 reports their performance
on finishing all test queries on all benchmarks.“Fastest Found Plan”
refers to the fastest plan generated by exhaustively search for each
query. Overall, Lero achieves the best performance, compared with
Bao, Bao+, and PostgreSQL’s optimizer. Its performance is close to
the fastest found plans on STATS, TPC-H and TPC-DS.
• Lero’s execution time is70%, 44%, 21% and 13% less than Post-
greSQL’s native query optimizer on IMDB, STATS, TPC-H, and
TPC-DS, respectively. This demonstrates Lero’s practical value
and advantages over the traditional optimizer in this scenario.
• Lero’s execution time is26%, 25%, 37% and 5% less than Bao on
IMDB, STATS, TPC-H and TPC-DS, respectively. This verifies the
effectiveness of our learning-to-rank paradigm and the pairwise
trained comparator model (rather than a model predicting the
exact latency). Moreover, compared with the hint set tuning
approach in Bao, the plan explorer in Lero is able to generate
better and more diversified plans, as described in Section 4.2,
for the comparator model to learn and achieve superior query
performance. Detailed comparison and experimental analysis of
different plan exploration strategies will be given in Section 6.6.
• Bao+ learns from all the candidate plans generated by hint set
tuning and achieves a decent performance improvement over
Bao. Nevertheless, Lero’s execution time is still around20% less
than Bao+ on the three benchmarks, due to Lero’s more effective
pairwise learning-to-rank model and plan exploration strategy.
6.2.2 Analysis of Performance Improvement/Regression. Figure 5
compares the per-query execution time of each learned optimizer
(Bao, Bao+ and Lero) with PostgreSQL on the 146 test queries of
STATS. We do not plot the 47 queries, for each of which PostgreSQL
and all the three learned optimizers choose the same plan for execu-
tion. We sort all remaining queries by latency differences between
each optimizer and PostgreSQL from slowdown to speedup to visu-
alize performance regression/improvement of Lero and others.
In comparison to Bao and Bao+,Lero significantly reduces perfor-
mance regressions and brings much more performance gains. Only
9 queries (6.2%) are slowed down inLero (for more than one second)
among 146 queries, while 33 queries are accelerated significantly.
Bao and Bao+ cause regressions for 29 queries each, which are even
more than the number of queries they are able to improve (26 in
Bao and 24 in Bao+). When performance regression does happen
in Lero, the relative slowdown of execution time, however, is much
smaller. For instance, for the STATS workload, the maximum slow-
down in Lero is 246𝑠, which translates to a relative performance
regression of 5.2%, while the maximum slowdown in Bao is 1, 276𝑠
with a relative performance regression of 46.5%. Appendix C pro-
vides more detailed analysis on how the plans selected by different
optimizers rank among the truly best plans, which explains the
performance improvement in Lero.
6.2.3 Performance Curves since Deployment. In Figure 6, we meter
the performance curves of learned optimizers since their deploy-
ment for each workload, i.e., accumulated execution time of the
best plans chosen by different optimizers in each workload (see Sec-
tion 6.1 for the definition). The “Fastest Found Plan” curve refers to
the conceptual latency lower bound as is defined in Section 6.2.1.
• The training of Lero converges faster. After seeing 200 queries
in IMDB, 100 queries in STATS, TPC-H and TPC-DS respectively,
Lero’s performance is consistently better than PostgreSQL and

=== PAGE 10 ===
103
102
10
1
10
102
103
104
Time (s)
Bao
Slowdown
Speedup
103
102
10
1
10
102
103
104
Time (s)
Bao+
Slowdown
Speedup
103
102
10
1
10
102
103
104
Time (s)
Lero
Slowdown
Speedup
Figure 5: Per-query execution time of different query optimizers in comparison with PostgreSQL on the STATS benchmark.
100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 9001000
# of queries
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14Time (h)
IMDB
PostgreSQL
Bao
Bao+
Lero
Fastest Found Plan
100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 9001000
# of queries
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200Time (h)
STATS
PostgreSQL
Bao
Bao+
Lero
Fastest Found Plan
30 60 90 120 150 180 210 240 270
# of queries
0
2
4
6
8
10Time (h)
TPC-H
PostgreSQL
Bao
Bao+
Lero
Fastest Found Plan
50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450
# of queries
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7Time (h)
TPC-DS
PostgreSQL
Bao
Bao+
Lero
Fastest Found Plan
Figure 6: Performance curve of different query optimizers since deployment on benchmarks.
other learned optimizers. While Bao and Bao+ eventually out-
perform PostgreSQL, they do so after seeing much more queries.
This confirms that training Lero’s learning-to-rank model for
query optimization is much more effective than training the
latency prediction models in Bao and Bao+.
• The performance gaps between Lero and Bao/Bao+ gradually
enlarge as more and more queries are executed. Eventually, Lero
brings much more significant performance gain over PostgreSQL
than Bao and Bao+ do. Its total execution time (right-end of each
in Figure 6) is, e.g., 47%, 38% and 23% less than PostgreSQL, Bao
and Bao+, respectively, on STATS.
• Lero’s performance is more robust. It consistently outperforms
PostgreSQL on all the benchmarks while the performance of Bao
and Bao+ is sometimes worse than PostgreSQL (e.g. on TPC-H
and TPC-DS). This is due to the intrinsic hardness of latency
prediction which could require more training data and more
time to converge in order to demonstrate any performance gain.
6.3 Query Optimization Cost
While achieving significant improvement in query execution per-
formance, Lero spends extra query optimization time in generat-
ing a list of candidate plans for an input query and applying the
comparator model to pick the best candidate. The average query
optimization time per-query of different optimizers is reported in
Table 2. We observe that this extra cost in query optimization is
very low. In particular, the total extra cost is only at most2.4% of the
total query execution time on IMDB and less than 0.1% on STATS,
TPC-H and TPC-DS. Whereas, Lero saves 13% to 70% execution
time in comparison with PostgreSQL on these benchmarks.
6.4 Adapting to Dynamic Data
We now examine the performance of learned query optimizers on
dynamic data. We use the STATS dataset for the experiment as each
tuple is associated with a time stamp. We split the data by time.
Initially, the earliest 50% of the data is stored in the database. After
the first 200 queries are executed on this database, we add 12.5%
of the data into the database in the order of time stamps every 200
following queries. The goal is to evaluate how well different learned
optimizers adapt to dynamic data by updating their models.
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
# of queries (x100)
0
20
40
60
80
100Time (h)
STATS
PostgreSQL
Bao
Bao+
Lero
(a) Performance since deployment
PostgreSQL Bao Bao+ Lero
12
14
16
18
20
22Time (h)
STATS (b) Performance with stable models
Figure 7: Performance of optimizers on dynamic data.
Time (in millisecond) PostgreSQL Bao/Bao+ Lero
IMDB 842 856 1 , 736
STATS 7 8 .1 16
TPC-H 5.3 6 .2 12 .6
TPC-DS 6.7 8 .5 15 .8
Table 2: Average query optimization time per query.
We report the performance curve since deployment for each opti-
mizer on dynamic data in Figure 7(a), as well as their performance
with stable models in Figure 7(b).
Lero outperforms PostgreSQL, Bao, and Bao+ in both settings.
After 1,000 queries, Lero’s accumulated query execution time is50%
less than PostgreSQL and 38% less than Bao/Bao+ (right-end of Fig-
ure 7(a)). In parallel to query processing, all the learned optimizers
continuously refine their models to adapt to the dynamic changes
of data. It turns out that Lero adapts to such data changes better
than the other two learned optimizers. Eventually, after all the data
changes are done, Lero’s query performance (Figure 7(b)) is 33%,
29% and 10% better than PostgreSQL, Bao and Bao+, respectively.
In Figure 7(a), we observe Lero’s robust performance, for the
reason analyzed at the end of Section 3.2. Only Lero consistently
performs better than PostgreSQL, while Bao is worse than Post-
greSQL at the beginning and Bao+ performs worse in the middle.
6.5 Importance of Pre-Training
Lero relies on the pre-training procedure to learn from the na-
tive query optimizer and better bootstrap its own model. The pre-
training time is only around 5 minutes on each of these benchmarks.
It converges fast as the native cost model often consists of functions
with simple structures, i.e., piecewise linear or quadratic function
of estimated cardinalities of sub-queries with magic constants as
coefficients for different operators.

=== PAGE 11 ===
0 100 200 300 400 500
# of queries
0
2
4
6
8Time (h)
IMDB
PostgreSQL
Lero (pre-train)
Lero (cold-start)
0 100 200 300 400 500
# of queries
0
20
40
60
80Time (h)
STATS
PostgreSQL
Lero (pre-train)
Lero (cold-start)
Figure 8: Effects of pre-training on Lero’s performance
curve.
Average Plans Faster Plans SlowerDataset Strategy #of Plansthan PostgreSQLthan PostgreSQL
IMDB Lero’s plan explorer 9 47% 42%
Hint set tuning 16 36% 57%
STATS Lero’s plan explorer 5 31% 49%
Hint set tuning 19 25% 69%
TPC-H Lero’s plan explorer 7 24% 64%
Hint set tuning 15 6% 88%
Table 3: Number and quality of unique candidate plans gen-
erated by different plan exploration strategies.
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
# of queries (x100)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14Time (h)
IMDB
PostgreSQL
Lero (our method)
Lero (hint set)
Lero (random)
0 3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 27
# of queries (x10)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12Time (h)
TPC-H
PostgreSQL
Lero (out method)
Lero (hint set)
Lero (random)
Figure 9: Performance curves of Lero since deployment with
different plan exploration strategies.
In this experiment, we evaluate the impact of the pre-training
procedure on Lero’s performance. We start with either a pre-trained
comparator model, or a cold-start model with random parameters;
both are continuously trained/updated as more and more queries
are executed. Figure 8 illustrates their performance curves on IMDB
and STATS for the first 500 queries (the results on TPC-H are similar,
so the figure is omitted due to the space constraint).
With pre-training, for the initial 100 queries, Lero could gener-
ate almost the same plans as PostgreSQL since its comparator is
pre-trained to fit PostgreSQL’s native cost model; thus, their per-
formances are very close (this can be also observed in our former
experiments where Lero is pre-trained). Note that Lero does not
need to execute any query during the pre-training procedure, as
introduced in Section 3.2. Without pre-training,Lero’s performance
can be worse than PostgreSQL for the first 200 queries before it
eventually catches up. After executing nearly 300 queries, the slope
of the two methods are almost the same. This indicates that Lero
with a cold-start could catch up but with more training time.
Proper pre-training from the knowledge of the native query
optimizer gives Lero a good starting point and also accelerates its
model’s convergence. With pre-training,Lero could consistently
outperform PostgreSQL after the initial 100 queries, while with a
cold-start comparator, Lero consistently outperforms PostgreSQL
only after seeing nearly 200 queries.
6.6 Plan Exploration Strategies
Recall that, for each query, the plan explorer in Lero generates
a list of candidate plans, which need to include some truly good
plans (for query optimization) and be diversified (for model to learn
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
# of queries (x100)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16Time (h)
IMDB
PostgreSQL
Lero (100%)
Lero (50%)
Lero (25%)
Lero (12.5%)
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
# of queries (x100)
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175Time (h)
STATS
PostgreSQL
Lero (100%)
Lero (50%)
Lero (25%)
Lero (12.5%)
Figure 10: Performance curves of Lero since deployment
with different amounts of idle resource.
new knowledge). Besides the plan exploration strategy described
in Figure 3, we also implement two other alternative approaches
in Lero to compare their performance: 1) the hint set-based strat-
egy introduced in Bao and 2) a random strategy which randomly
generates a number of plans.
Table 3 compares the quality and diversity of candidate plans
generated by our plan explorer with those generated by the hint
set-based strategy. On the third column, we report the number of
unique plans without duplication. On one hand, even with better
performance, Lero’s plan explorer actually generates fewer candi-
date plans per query on average than the hint set-based strategy
(duplicate plans may be output in different iterations of lines 4-8 in
Figure 3), which helps bring down the exploration cost. On the other
hand, a higher percentage of candidate plans generated by Lero’s
plan explorer run faster than the plan generated by PostgreSQL’s
native optimizer, which proves such candidate plans worthy to
explore and learn further. With cardinality tuning, Lero’s plan ex-
plorer is able to generate more diversified plans while the hint
set-based strategy typically generates plans with minor difference.
Figure 9 reports performance curves of Lero using different plan
exploration strategies on IMDB and TPC-H (performance on STATS
is similar to the one on IMDB, and thus is omitted due to the space
limits). Both Lero’s plan explorer and the hint set-based tuning
strategy perform much better than the random strategy. We also
observe that replacing Lero’s plan explorer with the hint set-based
tuning strategy performs worse. The hint set-based strategy has
some intrinsic limitations, as analyzed at the beginning of Section 4.
Lero’s plan explorer generates good and diversified plans for the
pairwise comparator model to explore and learn more effectively.
6.7 Effects of Idle Resource
We examine the performance curve of Lero since deployment with
different amounts of idle computation resource. By default, when
an incoming query 𝑄𝑡 +1 is to be processed, the comparator model
in Lero is trained and updated using execution statistics of different
candidate plans for earlier queries 𝑄1, 𝑄2, . . . , 𝑄𝑡 . Such statistics
are collected by running candidate plans in idle resource. When
the idle resource is limited, we may only be able to finish executing
candidate plans for a fraction of earlier queries𝑄1, 𝑄2, . . . , 𝑄𝑡 . With
only the first 50%, 25%, and 12.5% earlier queries having all of their
candidates executed on idle resource, we re-run the experiments in
Section 6.2.3. We demonstrate in Figure 10 that the performance of
Lero can still be improved over time and converge eventually.
Even with limited idle resource, the initial performance of Lero
is no worse than PostgreSQL, thanks to the pre-training procedure.
However, at the beginning, the quality of the selected plans is
indeed worse than the default setting (when 100% of earlier queries

=== PAGE 12 ===
Random Split Slow SplitSpeedup Ratio Train Test Train Test
Bao 1.62 1 .49 1 .17 1 .05
Bao+ 2.93 1 .58 4 .01 1 .74
Balsa 2.46 1 .55 1 .23 2.31
Lero 3.54 1.59 4.38 1.34
Table 4: Learned optimizers on IMDB with original JOB.
have their candidate plans executed on idle resource), because the
comparator model is not fully trained. We observe that the model
still converges fast even with very limited idle resource. For instance,
when only 12.5% queries have their candidate plans executed and
explored, the model converges after the first 500 and 200 queries
on IMDB and STATS, respectively.
Regardless of under which configuration, Lero becomes stable
eventually and performs almost the same (curves become parallel
towards the right end). This implies that limited idle resource would
definitely slow down the model’s learning and convergence, but
has little impact on the ultimate performance of Lero.
6.8 Comparison with Balsa
We compare Lero with Balsa on IMDB with the original JOB work-
load. We use its open-source implementation in [1, 51] and prepare
the dataset in the same way as [51]. Specifically, the 113 queries in
JOB are split into a training set (with 94 queries) and a testing set
(with 19 queries) in two ways: 1) random split and 2) the test set
consists of the 19 slowest-running queries. We run Balsa using its
default settings and compare it with Lero, Bao, and Bao+.
Table 4 exhibits the speedup ratio of each learned query optimizer
in comparison to PostgreSQL’s native optimizer. The performance
of Balsa matches or outperforms Bao, which is consistent with the
results in [51]. Both Bao and Balsa try to predict plan latency to
guide plan search, while Balsa has higher freedom of exploration
(Bao’s search space is limited by hint set tuning) [ 51]. Thus, it
performs better than Bao on small and stable workload. However,
even after Balsa’s model is comprehensively trained on this small
JOB workload, it still performs worse than Bao+ and Lero.
7 RELATED WORK
Learning to Optimize Queries. Recently, there is a flurry of re-
search to apply machine learning in query optimization [58]. The
majority of them focus on learned cardinality estimation, using
either query-driven or data-driven approaches. Query-driven meth-
ods [12, 22, 27] apply learned models to map featurized query to its
cardinality. Data-driven methods [18, 45, 50, 52, 53, 59] use different
generative models to directly learn the underlying data distribution.
Their superiority and limitations have been evaluated [16, 48]. Oth-
ers focus on refining traditional cost models and plan enumeration
algorithms. For learned cost models, [41] and [55, 57] utilize TreeL-
STM and convolution models to learn cost of single and concurrent
queries, respectively. Plan enumeration is often modelled as a re-
inforcement learning problem on deciding the best join order of
tables. [17, 23] and [54] use simple neural networks and TreeLSTM
model as value networks for join order selection, respectively. [44]
considers how to adjust the join order on the fly. These works only
optimize an individual component in query optimizer, which does
not necessarily improve the overall performance.
Besides them, recent works [33, 51] provide end-to-end learned
solutions for query optimization, and [32] learns to steer a native
query optimizer using hint set tuning. However, as analyzed in
Section 1.1, they suffer from lots of deficiencies arising from pre-
dicting the cost or latency. Based on plan exploration and pairwise
plan comparison, Lero learns the difference between plan pairs and
learns to improve the end-to-end quality of query optimization.
Learning-to-Rank Paradigm. Lero follows a learning-to-rank
paradigm, which is a class of learning techniques to train models for
ranking tasks [21, 28, 47]. It has been widely applied for, e.g., docu-
ment retrieval, collaborative filtering, and recommendation systems.
Based on how ranking is generated, the learning-to-rank techniques
could be classified into pointwise [14, 26], pairwise [13, 29] and list-
wise [38, 42] approaches. Among them, pairwise approach learns a
classifier on a pair of items to identify which one is better. To our
best knowledge, we are the first to apply apairwise learning-to-rank
paradigm to develop a learned query optimizer.
Learning to Tune Indexes. The task of indexing tuning is to find
the set of indexes that fits in a given storage budget and results
in the lowest execution cost for a given workload of queries. A
traditional index tuner [3, 5, 46] first searches for the optimal index
configuration for each query (query-level search), and then enumer-
ates different sets of those index configurations to find the optimal
index set for the workload under the budget (workload-level search).
Both phases need to compare the execution costs of two plans of
the same query given different index configurations. Traditional
index tuners rely on optimizer’s estimates for such comparisons,
while [10] trains a classifier to this end with higher accuracy.
While the query-level search in [10] can be regarded as an appli-
cation of learning-to-rank in index tuning, it has two fundamental
differences in comparison to Lero. First, the index tuner in [10] is
similar to traditional tuners [3, 5, 46], except that the classifier, as a
pairwise comparator model, is invoked during search procedures
to determine whether the plan of a query under a new index config-
uration is improved in comparison to the one under the initial one;
for a completely different task, query optimization,Lero is equipped
with two carefully designed components, plan explorer and plan
comparator model, which work together to explore the plan space.
Second, the comparator models in [10] and Lero both compare the
performance of two plans; however, with different goals in the two
tasks, the ways how features are encoded and the model architec-
tures in the two comparators are different. Appendix C compares
the two models experimentally.
8 CONCLUSIONS
We propose Lero, a learning-to-rank query optimizer. First, Lero
applies learning-to-rank machine learning techniques to query opti-
mization. We argue that it is an overkill to develop machine models
to predict the exact execution latency or cardinalities in terms of
query optimization. Instead, Lero adopts a pairwise approach to
train a binary classifier to compare any two plans, which is proven
to be more efficient and effective. Second, Lero takes advantage of
decades of wisdom of database research and jointly works with
the native query optimizer to improve optimization quality. Third,
Lero is equipped with a plan exploration strategy, which enables
Lero to explore new optimization opportunities more effectively.

=== PAGE 13 ===
Finally, an extensive evaluation on our implementation on top of
PostgreSQL demonstrates Lero’s superiority in query performance
and its ability to adapt to changing data and workload.
REFERENCES
[1] 2022. Balsa Implementation. https://github.com/balsa-project/balsa.
[2] 2022. Lero on PostgreSQL. https://github.com/Blondig/Lero-on-
PostgreSQL.
[3] Sanjay Agrawal, Surajit Chaudhuri, Lubor Kollár, Arunprasad P. Marathe, Vivek R.
Narasayya, and Manoj Syamala. 2004. Database Tuning Advisor for Microsoft
SQL Server 2005. In VLDB. 1110–1121.
[4] Ronnie Chaiken, Bob Jenkins, Per-Åke Larson, Bill Ramsey, Darren Shakib, Simon
Weaver, and Jingren Zhou. 2008. Scope: easy and efficient parallel processing of
massive data sets. PVLDB 1, 2 (2008), 1265–1276.
[5] Surajit Chaudhuri and Vivek R. Narasayya. 1997. An Efficient Cost-Driven Index
Selection Tool for Microsoft SQL Server. In VLDB. 146–155.
[6] Jianmin Chen, Xinghao Pan, Rajat Monga, Samy Bengio, and Rafal Jozefowicz.
2016. Revisiting distributed synchronous SGD. arXiv:1604.00981 (2016).
[7] Transaction Processing Performance Council(TPC). 2021. TPC-DS Vesion 2 and
Version 3. http://www.tpc.org/tpcds/.
[8] Transaction Processing Performance Council(TPC). 2021. TPC-H Vesion 2 and
Version 3. http://www.tpc.org/tpch/.
[9] Atreyee Dey, Sourjya Bhaumik, Harish Doraiswamy, and Jayant R. Haritsa. 2008.
Efficiently approximating query optimizer plan diagrams. Proc. VLDB Endow. 1,
2 (2008), 1325–1336.
[10] Bailu Ding, Sudipto Das, Ryan Marcus, Wentao Wu, Surajit Chaudhuri, and
Vivek R Narasayya. 2019. Ai meets ai: Leveraging query executions to improve
index recommendations. In SIGMOD. 1241–1258.
[11] Harish Doraiswamy, Pooja N. Darera, and Jayant R. Haritsa. 2008. Identifying
robust plans through plan diagram reduction. Proc. VLDB Endow. 1, 1 (2008),
1124–1140.
[12] Anshuman Dutt, Chi Wang, Azade Nazi, Srikanth Kandula, Vivek Narasayya,
and Surajit Chaudhuri. 2019. Selectivity estimation for range predicates using
lightweight models. PVLDB 12, 9 (2019), 1044–1057.
[13] Yoav Freund, Raj Iyer, Robert E Schapire, and Yoram Singer. 2003. An efficient
boosting algorithm for combining preferences. Journal of machine learning
research 4, Nov (2003), 933–969.
[14] Norbert Fuhr. 1989. Optimum polynomial retrieval functions based on the proba-
bility ranking principle. ACM Transactions on Information Systems 7, 3 (1989),
183–204.
[15] Yuxing Han. 2021. Github repository: STATS End-to-End CardEst Benchmark.
https://github.com/Nathaniel-Han/End-to-End-CardEst-Benchmark .
[16] Yuxing Han, Ziniu Wu, Peizhi Wu, Rong Zhu, Jingyi Yang, Tan Wei Liang, Kai
Zeng, Gao Cong, Yanzhao Qin, Andreas Pfadler, Zhengping Qian, Jingren Zhou,
Jiangneng Li, and Bin Cui. 2021. Cardinality Estimation in DBMS: A Comprehen-
sive Benchmark Evaluation. PVLDB 15, 4 (2021), 752–765.
[17] Todd Hester, Matej Vecerik, Olivier Pietquin, Marc Lanctot, Tom Schaul, Bilal
Piot, Dan Horgan, John Quan, Andrew Sendonaris, Ian Osband, et al. 2018. Deep
q-learning from demonstrations. In AAAI. 3223–3230.
[18] Benjamin Hilprecht, Andreas Schmidt, Moritz Kulessa, Alejandro Molina, Kristian
Kersting, and Carsten Binnig. 2020. DeepDB: learn from data, not from queries!
PVLDB 13, 7, 992–1005.
[19] Fürnkranz Johannes and Hüllermeier Eyke. 2011. Preference Learning. Preference
Learning.
[20] John J Kanet and V Sridharan. 2000. Scheduling with inserted idle time: problem
taxonomy and literature review. Operations Research 48, 1 (2000), 99–110.
[21] Alexandros Karatzoglou, Linas Baltrunas, and Yue Shi. 2013. Learning to rank
for recommender systems. In RecSys. ACM, 493–494.
[22] Andreas Kipf, Thomas Kipf, Bernhard Radke, Viktor Leis, Peter Boncz, and
Alfons Kemper. 2019. Learned cardinalities: Estimating correlated joins with
deep learning. In CIDR.
[23] Sanjay Krishnan, Zongheng Yang, Ken Goldberg, Joseph Hellerstein, and Ion
Stoica. 2018. Learning to optimize join queries with deep reinforcement learning.
arXiv:1808.03196 (2018).
[24] Viktor Leis, Andrey Gubichev, Atanas Mirchev, Peter Boncz, Alfons Kemper, and
Thomas Neumann. 2015. How good are query optimizers, really? PVLDB 9, 3
(2015), 204–215.
[25] Jiexing Li, Arnd Christian König, Vivek Narasayya, and Surajit Chaudhuri. 2012.
Robust estimation of resource consumption for sql queries using statistical tech-
niques. arXiv:1208.0278 (2012).
[26] Ping Li, Qiang Wu, and Christopher Burges. 2007. Mcrank: Learning to rank using
multiple classification and gradient boosting. Advances in neural information
processing systems 20 (2007).
[27] Jie Liu, Wenqian Dong, Qingqing Zhou, and Dong Li. 2021. Fauce: fast and
accurate deep ensembles with uncertainty for cardinality estimation. PVLDB 14,
11 (2021), 1950–1963.
[28] Tie-Yan Liu. 2009. Learning to Rank for Information Retrieval. Foundations and
Trends in Information Retrieval 3, 3 (2009), 225–331.
[29] Weiwen Liu, Qing Liu, Ruiming Tang, Junyang Chen, Xiuqiang He, and
Pheng Ann Heng. 2020. Personalized Re-ranking with Item Relationships for
E-commerce. In CIKM. 925–934.
[30] Ryan Marcus. 2020. Bao appendix. https://rmarcus.info/appendix.html.
[31] Ryan Marcus. 2020. Github repository: Bao for PostgreSQL. https://github.
com/learnedsystems/BaoForPostgreSQL.
[32] Ryan Marcus, Parimarjan Negi, Hongzi Mao, Nesime Tatbul, Mohammad Al-
izadeh, and Tim Kraska. 2021. Bao: Making learned query optimization practical.
In SIGMOD. 1275–1288.
[33] Ryan Marcus, Parimarjan Negi, Hongzi Mao, Chi Zhang, Mohammad Alizadeh,
Tim Kraska, Olga Papaemmanouil, and Nesime Tatbul. 2019. Neo: A Learned
Query Optimizer. PVLDB 12, 11 (2019), 1705–1718.
[34] Ryan Marcus and Olga Papaemmanouil. 2019. Plan-structured deep neural
network models for query performance prediction. PVLDB 12, 11 (2019), 1733–
1746.
[35] Guido Moerkotte, Thomas Neumann, and Gabriele Steidl. 2009. Preventing Bad
Plans by Bounding the Impact of Cardinality Estimation Errors. VLDB 2, 1 (2009),
982–993.
[36] Lili Mou, Ge Li, Lu Zhang, Tao Wang, and Zhi Jin. 2016. Convolutional neural
networks over tree structures for programming language processing. In AAAI.
1287–1293.
[37] Parimarjan Negi, Matteo Interlandi, Ryan Marcus, Mohammad Alizadeh, Tim
Kraska, Marc Friedman, and Alekh Jindal. 2021. Steering Query Optimizers: A
Practical Take on Big Data Workloads. In SIGMOD. 2557–2569.
[38] Liang Pang, Jun Xu, Qingyao Ai, Yanyan Lan, Xueqi Cheng, and Jirong Wen.
2020. Setrank: Learning a permutation-invariant ranking model for information
retrieval. In SIGIR. 499–508.
[39] Naveen Reddy and Jayant R. Haritsa. 2005. Analyzing Plan Diagrams of Database
Query Optimizers. In VLDB. 1228–1240.
[40] P Griffiths Selinger, Morton M Astrahan, Donald D Chamberlin, Raymond A
Lorie, and Thomas G Price. 1989. Access path selection in a relational database
management system. In Readings in Artificial Intelligence and Databases . Elsevier,
511–522.
[41] Ji Sun and Guoliang Li. 2019. An end-to-end learning-based cost estimator. PLDB
13, 3 (2019), 307–319.
[42] Robin Swezey, Aditya Grover, Bruno Charron, and Stefano Ermon. 2021. Pirank:
Scalable learning to rank via differentiable sorting.Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 34 (2021), 21644–21654.
[43] William R Thompson. 1933. On the likelihood that one unknown probability
exceeds another in view of the evidence of two samples.Biometrika 25, 3-4 (1933),
285–294.
[44] Immanuel Trummer, Junxiong Wang, Deepak Maram, Samuel Moseley, Saehan
Jo, and Joseph Antonakakis. 2019. Skinnerdb: Regret-bounded query evaluation
via reinforcement learning. In SIGMOD. 1153–1170.
[45] Kostas Tzoumas, Amol Deshpande, and Christian S Jensen. 2011. Lightweight
graphical models for selectivity estimation without independence assumptions.
PVLDB 4, 11 (2011), 852–863.
[46] Gary Valentin, Michael Zuliani, Daniel C. Zilio, Guy M. Lohman, and Alan Skelley.
2000. DB2 Advisor: An Optimizer Smart Enough to Recommend Its Own Indexes.
In ICDE. 101–110.
[47] Saúl Vargas and Pablo Castells. 2011. Rank and relevance in novelty and diversity
metrics for recommender systems. In Proceedings of the fifth ACM conference on
Recommender systems. 109–116.
[48] Xiaoying Wang, Changbo Qu, Weiyuan Wu, Jiannan Wang, and Qingqing Zhou.
2021. Are We Ready For Learned Cardinality Estimation? PVLDB 14, 9 (2021),
1640–1654.
[49] Wentao Wu, Yun Chi, Shenghuo Zhu, Junichi Tatemura, Hakan Hacigümüs, and
Jeffrey F Naughton. 2013. Predicting query execution time: Are optimizer cost
models really unusable?. In ICDE. 1081–1092.
[50] Ziniu Wu and Amir Shaikhha. 2020. BayesCard: A Unified Bayesian Framework
for Cardinality Estimation. arXiv:2012.14743 (2020).
[51] Zongheng Yang, Wei-Lin Chiang, Sifei Luan, Gautam Mittal, Michael Luo, and Ion
Stoica. 2022. Balsa: Learning a Query Optimizer Without Expert Demonstrations.
SIGMOD (2022), 931–944.
[52] Zongheng Yang, Amog Kamsetty, Sifei Luan, Eric Liang, Yan Duan, Xi Chen, and
Ion Stoica. 2021. NeuroCard: One Cardinality Estimator for All Tables. PVLDB
14, 1 (2021), 61–73.
[53] Zongheng Yang, Eric Liang, Amog Kamsetty, Chenggang Wu, Yan Duan, Xi Chen,
Pieter Abbeel, Joseph M Hellerstein, Sanjay Krishnan, and Ion Stoica. 2019. Deep
unsupervised cardinality estimation. PVLDB 13, 3 (2019), 279–292.
[54] Xiang Yu, Guoliang Li, Chengliang Chai, and Nan Tang. 2020. Reinforcement
learning with tree-lstm for join order selection. In ICDE. 1297–1308.
[55] Johan Kok Zhi Kang, Sien Yi Tan, Feng Cheng, Shixuan Sun, and Bingsheng
He. 2021. Efficient Deep Learning Pipelines for Accurate Cost Estimations Over
Large Scale Query Workload. In SIGMOD. 1014–1022.

=== PAGE 14 ===
[56] Li Zhou. 2015. A survey on contextual multi-armed bandits. arXiv:1508.03326
(2015).
[57] Xuanhe Zhou, Ji Sun, Guoliang Li, and Jianhua Feng. 2020. Query performance
prediction for concurrent queries using graph embedding. PVLDB 13, 9 (2020),
1416–1428.
[58] Rong Zhu, Ziniu Wu, Chengliang Chai, Andreas Pfadler, Bolin Ding, Guoliang Li,
and Jingren Zhou. 2022. Learned Query Optimizer: At the Forefront of AI-Driven
Databases.. In EDBT. 1–4.
[59] Rong Zhu, Ziniu Wu, Yuxing Han, Kai Zeng, Andreas Pfadler, Zhengping Qian,
Jingren Zhou, and Bin Cui. 2021. FLAT: Fast, Lightweight and Accurate Method
for Cardinality Estimation. PVLDB 14, 9 (2021), 1489–1502.
APPENDIX
A COMPARATOR WITH 𝑑-𝑑𝑖𝑚 EMBEDDING
Our plan comparator model CmpPlan (described in Section 3.1)
could be easily extended from 1-𝑑𝑖𝑚 plan embedding to use 𝑑-𝑑𝑖𝑚
(𝑑 > 1) plan embedding. We use the same way on encoding plans
and slightly modify the plan comparator model (shown in Figure 2)
as follows:
(1) In the plan embedding layers, we change the output dimen-
sion of last embedding layer to 𝑑 so that the plan embedding
PlanEmb(𝑃) becomes a 𝑑-𝑑𝑖𝑚 vector for any plan 𝑃.
(2) We change the comparison layer to a learnable linear layer.
It takes two 𝑑-𝑑𝑖𝑚 vectors PlanEmb(𝑃1) and PlanEmb(𝑃2)
as inputs, and outputs 0 (𝑃1 is better) or 1 (𝑃2 is better).
Next, we discuss how to select the best plan under 𝑑-𝑑𝑖𝑚 em-
bedding (in A.1) and the performance of plan comparator w.r.t. the
dimensions of plan embedding (in A.2).
A.1 Selecting the Best Plan using Comparators
Recall that the plan comparator CmpPlan(𝑃1, 𝑃2) is an oracle com-
paring any two plans 𝑃1 and 𝑃2 of a query. Given a list of candidate
plans 𝑃1, 𝑃2, . . . , 𝑃𝑛 of a query, for 𝑑-𝑑𝑖𝑚 embeddings, let
Wins(𝑃𝑖 ) = |{𝑃 𝑗 | CmpPlan(𝑃𝑖, 𝑃𝑗 ) = 0, 𝑗 ≠ 𝑖}|, (7)
be the number of plans whose latencies are worse than𝑃𝑖. Wins(𝑃𝑖 )
defines a full order of all candidate plans. Obviously, the best candi-
date plan 𝑃 ∗ has Wins(𝑃 ∗) = 𝑛 − 1.
A comparator with 𝑑-𝑑𝑖𝑚 plan embeddings can be trained in a
pairwise way similar to the one introduced in Section 3.2 (without
pre-training though). After the comparator is fully trained, we can
use it to pick the best plan among candidates𝑃1, . . . , 𝑃𝑛 of a possibly
unseen query 𝑄. In the general design where we have 𝑑 ≥ 1 for
the plan embeddings, we do not require a fully trained CmpPlan to
preserve transitivity, i.e., 𝑃1 is better than 𝑃2 and 𝑃2 is better than
𝑃3 imply that 𝑃1 is better than 𝑃3. In order to pick the best plan
among candidates 𝑃1, . . . , 𝑃𝑛, we can invoke CmpPlan 𝑛(𝑛 − 1)
times to compare all pairs of candidates. In general, the output
CmpPlan(𝑃𝑖, 𝑃𝑗 ) ∈ ( 0, 1) gives a soft prediction (i.e., the predicted
probability of whether 𝑃𝑖 or 𝑃 𝑗 is better). We use the algorithm A
in Eq. (3) to pick the better one, and define randomized wins as
RandomWins(𝑃𝑖 ) = |{𝑃 𝑗 | A (𝑃𝑖, 𝑃𝑗 ) = 𝑃𝑖, 𝑗 ≠ 𝑖}| .
Accordingly, in the 𝑑-𝑑𝑖𝑚 setting, we choose the best plan as
𝑃 ∗ = arg max
𝑃𝑖 ∈ {𝑃1,...,𝑃𝑛 }
RandomWins(𝑃𝑖 )
with the most randomized wins–ties are broken arbitrarily.
In the more practical design of CmpPlan with 1-𝑑𝑖𝑚 plan em-
bedding (Section 3.1), we do not need to derive RandomWins(𝑃𝑖 )
as above. Instead, the output of the sub-model PlanEmb defines a
total order on all candidate plans. For any pair of plans (𝑃𝑖, 𝑃𝑗 ), if
PlanEmb(𝑃𝑖 ) > PlanEmb(𝑃 𝑗 ), we always have CmpPlan(𝑃𝑖, 𝑃𝑗 ) >
0.5, i.e., 𝑃 𝑗 is more preferable than 𝑃𝑖 with higher probability than
vice versa. Therefore, we could select 𝑃 ∗ = arg min𝑃𝑖 PlanEmb(𝑃𝑖 )
in the 1-𝑑𝑖𝑚 setting as the best plan for execution.
We can show that, 𝑃 ∗ chosen in this way is indeed the one
with the most randomized wins in expectation (thus, the choice is
equivalent to the one for the general design, in expectation).
Proposition 3. 𝑃 ∗ = arg min𝑃𝑖 PlanEmb(𝑃𝑖 ) chosen with the
lowest 1-𝑑𝑖𝑚 embedding also wins the most: it satisfies
𝑃 ∗ = arg max
𝑃𝑖 ∈ {𝑃1,...,𝑃𝑛 }
E[RandomWins(𝑃𝑖 )] .
Proof. By the model construction, for each 𝑃𝑖, we have
E[RandomWins(𝑃𝑖 )] =
∑︁
𝑗 ∈ [𝑛],𝑗 ≠𝑖
Pr

A (𝑃𝑖, 𝑃𝑗 ) = 𝑃𝑖

=
∑︁
𝑗 ∈ [𝑛],𝑗 ≠𝑖
(1 − CmpPlan(𝑃𝑖, 𝑃𝑗 )) =
∑︁
𝑗 ∈ [𝑛],𝑗 ≠𝑖
CmpPlan(𝑃 𝑗 , 𝑃𝑖 )
=©­
«
∑︁
𝑗 ∈ [𝑛]
𝜙 (PlanEmb(𝑃 𝑗 ) − PlanEmb(𝑃𝑖 ))ª®
¬
− 𝜙 (0). (8)
From Eq. (8), it is straightforward that 𝑃 ∗ ∈ { 𝑃1, . . . , 𝑃𝑛 } with
the lowest PlanEmb(·) would maximize E[RandomWins(·)]. □
A.2 Performance of Comparator with Different
Dimension of Plan Embedding
We test the performance of Lero with different dimensions of plan
embedding. We set 𝑑 = {1, 2, 4, 8, 16}, train Lero on the training
workload and then test its performance on the test workload. Table 5
reports the execution time of Lero with different dimensions of
plan embedding on IMDB and STATS benchmarks. Similar results
are also observed on TPC-H and TPC-DS benchmarks.
Time (in hour) IMDB STATS
PostgreSQL 1.15 20.19
Lero (𝑑 = 1) 0.35 11.32
Lero (𝑑 = 2) 0.77 20.74
Lero (𝑑 = 4) 0.69 21.2
Lero (𝑑 = 8) 0.49 21.38
Lero (𝑑 = 16) 0.59 21.19
Table 5: Performance of Lero with different dimensions of
plan embedding.
Interestingly, we observe that the performance of Lero does
not necessarily increase with higher dimensional embeddings. On
the contrary, Lero with complex embedding ( 𝑑 > 1) has much
worse performance than using the simplest 1-𝑑𝑖𝑚 plan embedding.
Specifically, on IMDB, the the execution time of Lero with a larger
𝑑 ∈ { 2, 4, 8, 16} is 1.4 times to 2.2 times as long as the case with𝑑 = 1.
On STATS, the execution time ofLero with 𝑑 > 1 is around 1.8 times
longer than 𝑑 = 1, even longer than the execution time of the native
PostgreSQL. The reason could be that, with 𝑑 > 1, the embedding
model PlanEmb tries to summarize more sophisticated information

=== PAGE 15 ===
in plan embeddings, but also requires larger training dataset and
more training time to obtain more accurate embeddings and to
converge. Therefore, the training workload may be not enough to
comprehensively capture enough information for plan comparison,
so the selected plan may be not the best one.
In our experiments, Lero using 1-𝑑𝑖𝑚 plan embedding already
attains significant performance improvement in comparison to
the native query optimizer. Moreover, when 𝑑 > 1, it is not as
convenient to select the best plan as when 𝑑 = 1 (although Proposi-
tion 3 says that there is an equivalent way for plan selection), since
PlanEmb(𝑃) cannnot define a total order on all plans𝑃 when 𝑑 > 1.
Thus, we use the simplest 1-𝑑𝑖𝑚 plan embeddings in Lero.
B EXPLORATION HEURISTIC BASED ON
PLAN DIAGRAM
Errors in estimating predicate selectivities can be propagated from
bottom to top during the plan search, and incur a wrong join order
and sub-optimal choices of join types. A plan diagram [9, 11] can
be constructed by varying values of parameters in one or more
predicates of the query 𝑄, so that the optimizer generates a set
of different plans. For example, for a query with a parameterized
predicate “@lower ≤ Age ≤ @upper”, the optimizer may generate
different plans by setting (@lower, @upper) as (20, 30) or (10, 40).
These plans form a diagram of different regions on the 2D space
(@lower, @upper): within each region, the optimizer outputs the
same plan.
It is shown in [9, 11] that replacing selectivity error-sensitive plan
choices with alternatives in the plan diagram provides potentially
better performance. Therefore, we can use plans in the plan diagram
as the list of candidates to explore the uncertainty from estimating
predicates’ selectivities in the native optimizer.
The drawbacks of this strategy are obvious. It is not affordable to
generate a plan diagram by varying parameters on more than two
tables, as the number of candidate plans would be too large [9]. If we
tune parameters on two tables, the candidates may not be diversified
enough to include plans with quality sufficiently higher than the
plan generated by the native optimizer. In our evaluation on the
STATS benchmark [16], even the best candidate in a plan diagram
does not have significant performance improvement. Specifically,
the average performance improvement of the best candidate is less
than 3%, and the best candidates of only less than 5% of queries are
faster than those generated by PostgreSQL’s optimizer.
C ADDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS
C.1 Rank-Specific Analysis
For a query optimizer, what we care about is whether the selected
plan 𝑃 ∗ is truly the best one; if not, whether it is among the top-𝑘
best plans. To this end, let P𝑘 be the set of top-𝑘 fastest plans gen-
erated by exhaustively search for each query (in terms of execution
time). For different benchmarks, we record the ratio of queries for
which 𝑃 ∗ falls into P𝑘. Table 6 lists results for each query optimizer
for P1 and P5. The percentage of plans selected byLero falling into
P1 and P5 is much higher than that by other query optimizers. This
verifies that Lero could find plans having higher quality in terms of
the rank-specific metrics.
Query Plans inP1 Plans inP5
Optimizer STATS IMDB TPC-H STATS IMDB TPC-H
PostgreSQL 0.137 0.000 0.167 0.459 0.336 0.867
Bao 0.144 0.159 0.000 0.226 0.230 0.167
Bao+ 0.096 0.221 0.833 0.171 0.319 1.000
Lero 0.425 0.442 0.733 0.925 0.708 1.000
Table 6: Rank-specific metrics for different query optimiz-
ers.
100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 9001000
# of queries
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14Time (h)
IMDB
PostgreSQL
Lero (Our Model)
Lero (Ding's Model)
30 60 90 120 150 180 210 240 270
# of queries
0
2
4
6
8
10Time (h)
TPC-H
PostgreSQL
Lero (Our Model)
Lero (Ding's Model)
Figure 11: Performance curves of Lero with different com-
parator models.
C.2 Effects of Comparator Model
To verify the effectiveness of our comparator model in Lero, we
conduct an experiment to replace Lero’s plan encoding approach
and comparator model with the ones in [ 10], and compare their
performance. The results on IMDB and TPC-H are reported in
Figure 11.Lero with the comparator model from [10] performs much
worse than ours, which is not surprising as the model from [ 10]
does not consider the structural information in the plan.
Specifically, the goal of [10] is index selection, what really mat-
ters is the amount of work done in the plan by the each type of
operators, with or without indexes. Thus, a plan is flattened as a
vector encoding the total estimated costs and amount of data pro-
cessed by each type of operator. In Lero, the goal is plan selection,
and thus we need finer-grained information on each node (e.g.,
operator type, estimates, tables involved) unfolded and use the tree
convolution operation to capture more structural information and
correlation between tables.