=== PAGE 1 ===
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
LLMOPT: L EARNING TO DEFINE AND SOLVE GEN-
ERAL OPTIMIZATION PROBLEMS FROM SCRATCH
Caigao Jiang♥∗, Xiang Shu ♣∗, Hong Qian ♣†, Xingyu Lu ♥†,
Jun Zhou♥, Aimin Zhou ♣, Yang Yu ♦
♣ East China Normal University, China ♥ Ant Group, China ♦ Nanjing University, China
shux@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, {hqian,amzhou}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn,
{caigao.jcg,sing.lxy,jun.zhoujun}@antgroup.com, yuy@nju.edu.cn
ABSTRACT
Optimization problems are prevalent across various scenarios. Formulating and
then solving optimization problems described by natural language often requires
highly specialized human expertise, which could block the widespread applica-
tion of optimization-based decision making. To automate problem formulation
and solving, leveraging large language models (LLMs) has emerged as a potential
way. However, this kind of approach suffers from the issue of optimization gener-
alization. Namely, the accuracy of most current LLM-based methods and the gen-
erality of optimization problem types that they can model are still limited. In this
paper, we propose a unified learning-based framework called LLMOPT to boost
optimization generalization. Starting from the natural language descriptions of op-
timization problems and a pre-trained LLM, LLMOPT constructs the introduced
five-element formulation as a universal model for learning to define diverse op-
timization problem types. Then, LLMOPT employs the multi-instruction tuning
to enhance both problem formalization and solver code generation accuracy and
generality. After that, to prevent hallucinations in LLMs, such as sacrificing solv-
ing accuracy to avoid execution errors, the model alignment and self-correction
mechanism are adopted in LLMOPT. We evaluate the optimization generalization
ability of LLMOPT and compared methods across six real-world datasets cov-
ering roughly 20 fields such as health, environment, energy and manufacturing,
etc. Extensive experiment results show that LLMOPT is able to model various
optimization problem types such as linear/nonlinear programming, mixed integer
programming, and combinatorial optimization, and achieves a notable 11.08% av-
erage solving accuracy improvement compared with the state-of-the-art methods.
The code is available at https://github.com/caigaojiang/LLMOPT.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Optimization problems are widespread in a variety of scenarios, such as job scheduling (Brandi-
marte, 1993), path planning (Hong et al., 2016; Li et al., 2023), matching problem (Wang et al.,
2020), reinforcement leaning (Qian & Yu, 2021), revenue management (Trimborn et al., 2018) and
security games (Brown et al., 2012; Qian et al., 2025), etc. Although powerful solvers are available,
formally defining domain-specific optimization problems from natural language descriptions and
then developing the solver code are highly complex tasks. It requires specialized domain knowl-
edge, expert participation, and significant time investment. For example, in finance, the portfolio
problems (Chen et al., 2021) often manage thousands of variables and complex constraints, such
as full investment constraints, cardinality constraints and pre-assignment constraints, where expert
intervention is crucial for achieving accurate (i.e., low simple regret) solutions due to the complexity
and specialization of optimization problems.
With the rapid development of large language models (LLMs) like ChatGPT (Brown et al., 2020)
and GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023), using LLMs to automatically formulate and solve optimization prob-
∗Both authors contribute equally to this research.
†Corresponding authors.
1
arXiv:2410.13213v2  [cs.AI]  3 Mar 2025
=== PAGE 2 ===
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Anaccountingfirmemploysparttimeworkersandfulltimeworkers.Fulltimeworkerswork8hourspershiftwhileparttimeworkerswork4hourspershift.Inaddition,fulltimeworkersarepaid$300pershiftwhileparttimeworkersarepaid$100pershift.Currently,theaccountingfirmhasaprojectrequiring450hoursoflabor.Ifthefirmhasabudgetof$15000,howmanyofeachtypeofworkershouldbescheduledtominimizethetotalnumberofworkers.
ProblemDescriptionFive-ElementFormulationSet of employee types: 𝒮=	{𝑓,𝑝}Hours per shift: ℎ!=	8, ℎ"=	4Wages per shift:	𝑤!=	300, 𝑤"=	100Total labor time required: 𝑇	=450Budget: 𝐵	=	15000Employees shifts: 𝑥!,𝑥"Minimize employee number: min	$!,$"	𝑥!+𝑥"Labor time onstraint: ℎ!𝑥!+	ℎ"𝑥"≥𝑇Budget constraint: 𝑤!𝑥!+	𝑤"𝑥"≤𝐵Positive integer constraint: 𝑥!,𝑥"∈ℤ#Constraints
Parameters
Sets
ObjectiveVariables
from pyomo.environ import * model = ConcreteModel()  model.x_f = Var(domain=NonNegativeReals) model.x_p = Var(domain=NonNegativeReals)  model.objective = Objective(expr=model.x_f + model.x_p, sense=minimize)  model.c1 = Constraint(expr=8 * model.x_f + 4 * model.x_p >>= 500) model.c2 = Constraint(expr=300 * model.x_f + 100 * model.x_p <<= 15000) ..... 
from pyomo.environ import * model = ConcreteModel()  model.x_f = Var(domain=NonNegativeIntegers) model.x_p = Var(domain=NonNegativeIntegers)  model.objective = Objective(expr=model.x_f + model.x_p, sense=minimize)  model.c1 = Constraint(expr=8 * model.x_f + 4 * model.x_p >>= 500) model.c2 = Constraint(expr=300 * model.x_f + 100 * model.x_p <<= 15000) ..... 
GenerateSolverCodeGenerateSolverCode
Optimal Solution Found:Number of Full-Time Shifts (x_f): 37.5Number of Part-Time Shifts (x_p): 37.5Total Number of Employees: 75.0Optimal Solution Found:Number of Full-Time Shifts (x_f): 37Number of Part-Time Shifts (x_p): 39Total Number of Employees: 76CorrectIncorrectMissinginteger constraint Correct definition and solution
ProblemDescriptionFive-Element Formulation
Figure 1: An example of the proposed five-element formulation, which provides a structured defini-
tion for general optimization problems. Using the five-element formulation as an intermediate step
can lead to more accurate solver code and solution.
lems described by natural language is becoming increasingly attractive. Existing work on it can be
roughly divided into prompt-based and learning-based methods. Pioneering studies like Chain-of-
Expert (Xiao et al., 2024) and OptiMUS (AhmadiTeshnizi et al., 2024) explore prompt-based meth-
ods, using LLM interfaces to extract key information and solve optimization problems. Although
these methods show promise, recent advances in learning-based methods, such as LLaMoCo (Ma
et al., 2024) and ORLM (Tang et al., 2024), could show even greater potential. ORLM (Tang et al.,
2024) reveals that a fine-tuned 7B open-source model can outperform larger pre-trained models like
GPT-4, highlighting the value of learning-based methods for optimization tasks.
Although previous research has established the use of LLMs for formulating and solving optimiza-
tion problems described by natural language, their optimization generalization remains limited, re-
stricting broader applicability and deployment across diverse problems. Optimization generaliza-
tion, which involves both accuracy and generality in assessing whether LLMs can effectively solve
general optimization problems, remains a significant challenge. Specifically, accuracy refers to solv-
ing problems correctly, and generality refers to the ability to model and solve diverse optimization
problem types across different task scenarios.
In this paper, we propose a unified learning-based framework called LLMOPT to significantly boost
the optimization generalization. Through focusing on improving both accuracy and generality to
effectively define and solve a wide range of optimization problems, this work tries to narrow the gap
between methods and practical applications. Specifically, we propose the five-element formulation
to define optimization problems to improve the accuracy of solving, as illustrated in Figure 1. To
ensure the effectiveness of learning, we design a data augmentation process and perform data label-
ing, resulting in high-quality datasets. Leveraging these datasets, we implement multi-instruction
supervised fine-tuning to improve the LLM’s accuracy in both defining and solving optimization
problems. Additionally, we introduce model alignment to further enhance accuracy and reduce the
risk of hallucinations. We also develop an auto-testing process with a self-correction mechanism,
enabling the accurate and automated resolution of optimization problems. Finally, the optimiza-
tion generalization ability of LLMOPT is extensively evaluated on six real-world optimization and
operation problem datasets involving roughly 20 domains, including health, environment, energy
and manufacturing, etc. The results show that LLMOPT effectively handles various optimization
2
=== PAGE 3 ===
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
problems, such as linear and nonlinear programming, mixed integer programming and combinato-
rial optimization, etc. Ablation studies validate the contributions of problem definition and model
alignment to improving accuracy. Notably,LLMOPT achieves an average accuracy improvement of
11.08% over state-of-the-art methods.
The consequent sections respectively introduce the related work, present the proposed LLMOPT,
show and analysis the empirical results, discuss important issues, and finally conclude the paper.
2 R ELATED WORK
LLMs for Formulating and Solving Optimization Problems . The NL4Opt competition (Rama-
monjison et al., 2021) encourages researchers to explore how LLMs can be leveraged to solve opti-
mization problems efficiently (Huang et al., 2024; Tang et al., 2024; Xiao et al., 2024; AhmadiTesh-
nizi et al., 2024; Ma et al., 2024). Related work can be divided into prompt-based and learning-based
methods. The prompt-based methods utilize existing LLM interfaces to automate the solving opti-
mization problems. Chain-of-Expert (CoE) (Xiao et al., 2024) introduces an agent-based workflow,
where specific tasks are assigned to LLM agents at each stage of reasoning, while OptiMUS (Ah-
madiTeshnizi et al., 2024) employs tailored prompts designed specifically for solving linear pro-
gramming and mixed-integer linear programming problems. The learning-based method remains
relatively underexplored. LLaMoCo (Ma et al., 2024) introduces an instruction tuning framework
in a code-to-code manner and demonstrates its efficacy through model fine-tuning. ORLM (Tang
et al., 2024) proposed a semi-automated approach to generating synthetic training data during the
instruction tuning phase, addressing the data-hungry nature of optimization modeling. Besides,
Mamo (Huang et al., 2024) offers a benchmark for mathematical modeling with two optimization
datasets, and introduces a standardized process to generate solver code using LLMs.
LLMs as Components of Optimizers . Yang et al. (2024b) propose to use LLMs as optimizers,
inspired by Bayesian optimization (Garnett, 2023). One LLM iteratively optimizes prompts, which
are then used to guide another LLM in performing specific optimization tasks. LLMs can also
serve as components within an optimizer (Guo et al., 2024; Yang & Li, 2023; Liu et al., 2024a;
2023; 2024b). Guo et al. (2024) uses LLMs to as the crossover and mutation operators in genetic
algorithms, thereby finding high-quality prompts. When solving the traveling salesman problem, Liu
et al. (2024a) uses LLMs to generate new trajectories based on existing ones, iteratively optimizing
them to produce higher-quality solutions. Liu et al. (2023) and Yang & Li (2023) apply LLMs to
specific multi-objective optimization tasks. Liu et al. (2024b) employs LLMs to simulate both the
acquisition function and the surrogate model in the Bayesian optimization process.
3 M ETHODOLOGY
3.1 A N OVERVIEW OF THE PROPOSED LLMOPT F RAMEWORK
This work aims to achieve a better optimization generalization of defining and solving the optimiza-
tion problems through a learning-based approach. To this end, this paper proposes the LLMOPT
framework, as illustrated in Figure 2, which comprises three key components: data, learning, and
auto-testing. The following sections provide a detailed introduction: First, in Section 3.2, we in-
troduce the five-element formulation to define general optimization problems well, and discuss the
augmentation and labeling of training data. Next, in Section 3.3, we detail the multi-instruction
supervised fine-tuning (SFT) process and model alignment to enhance solving accuracy. Finally, in
Section 3.4, we present the auto-testing process with self-correction.
3.2 D ATA: D EFINING AND LABELING GENERAL OPTIMIZATION PROBLEMS
3.2.1 U NIVERSAL FORMULATION TO DEFINE GENERAL OPTIMIZATION PROBLEMS
To enable LLMs to formulate more general optimization problems described in natural language,
we propose the five-element, a universal formulation to define optimization problems. Firstly, in
mathematics, an optimization problem can be formally represented as the following expression:
min
x∈X ⊆RD
f (x) , s.t. G (x) ≤ c , (1)
3
=== PAGE 4 ===
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Pre-trained LLM
LLMSFT
OptimizationProblemsLabel 5-Elementby Expert
Expert
GPT-4Generate 5-Element by GPT-4& Label by Expert
Label Codeby ExpertGenerate Code by GPT-4& Label by Expert
Expert
(a) Data
(c) Auto-Testing
(b) Learning
Datafor FormulationData for Solving
5-ElementProblem
 Code
 Results
Errors
Solver
LLMFINALLLMFINAL
Self-correction
LLMFINAL(Defining)(Solving)Logs
Formulation:Learning toDefine Solving:Learning to Generate Code 
KTOAlignment
SFT
LLMFINAL
OptimalSolution
Natural LanguageDescription
5-Element  ffor Problem  p
SolverCode sfor Problem  p
5-Element f '  withDesirability Label  d5-Element (Generated by GPT-4)Desirability(Labeled by Expert)
Solver Code s'  withDesirability Label  dSolver Code (Generated by GPT-4)Desirability(Labeled by Expert)
( p,  f  )Problemwith 5-ElementLabeled by Expert
( p, s )( f, s )Problem/5-Element with CodeLabeled by Expert
(  p,   f ' ,  d  )Problemwith 5-Element Generated by GPT-4& DesirabilityLabeled by Expert
( p, s', d )( f, s', d )
Problem/5-Element withSolver Code Generated by GPT-4 &Desirability Labeled by Expert
Figure 2: The framework of LLMOPT. Sub-figure (a) shows the data labeling process, where experts
and GPT-4 work together to label both the five-element formulation and solver code. Sub-figure (b)
shows the learning process, in which multi-instruction supervised fine-tuning and model alignment
are employed to learn-to-define and generate code. Sub-figure (c) shows the auto-testing process
with self-correction mechanism, which can define and solve optimization problems automatically.
where x = ( x1, x2, . . . , xD)⊤ is the D-dimensional decision variable, X ⊆ RD is the feasible
domain of x, and the goal is to minimize the objective function f : X → R. The constraints are
represented by the vector-valued function G(x) : RD → Rm, where G(x) ≤ c denotes a series of
inequality constraints, and c = (c1, c2, . . . , cm)⊤ is the vector of upper bounds for these constraints.
In practice, a vast majority of optimization problems can be formulated as shown in Formula 1.
Based on it, the five-element formulation provides a structured and intuitive way to define optimiza-
tion problems, retaining essential descriptions and making them more accessible and understand-
able, even for LLMs. As the name suggests, the five-element consist of the five key components
of an optimization problem: Sets, Parameters, Variables, Objective and Constraints. As shown in
Figure 1, the element Variables, Objective, and Constraints describe the decision variables x, the
objective function f (x), and the constraints G(x) in Formula 1, along with concise descriptions
for each. Meanwhile, Sets and Parameters provide detailed information of indices and descriptions,
as well as the specific numerical values of the parameters involved in the objective function and
constraints. Importantly, the five-element provides a more accurate formulation of the problem by
mining and preserving key descriptions of the problem. For example, in Figure 1, the positive integer
constraint is implicit in the problem but is effectively captured by the five-element formulation.
As a universal formulation, five-element can define various types of optimization problems, thereby
enhancing the optimization generalization ability. For instance, integer programming can be mod-
eled by adjusting the feasible region X , while linear and non-linear programming constraints are
captured by different forms of G(x). More complex problems, such as multi-objective optimiza-
tion, extend the objective function to a vector-valued form F (x). Additional examples illustrating
the formulation of various optimization problems are provided in Appendix J.
3.2.2 D ATA AUGMENTATION AND LABELING
The five-element formulation enables the mapping of optimization problems described in natural
language to a universal structure, which can then be used to generate solver code. However, the ef-
fectiveness of learning is significantly influenced by the quality, quantity, and distribution of training
data. Current available datasets are limited in these aspects and lack proper labels of formulations
and solver code. Therefore, data augmentation and labeling are employed to address these gaps.
Firstly, we collect almost all existing optimization problem datasets, including NL4Opt (Ramamon-
jison et al., 2021), Mamo (EasyLP and ComplexLP) (Huang et al., 2024), IndustryOR (Tang et al.,
4
=== PAGE 5 ===
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
2024), NLP4LP (AhmadiTeshnizi et al., 2024) and ComplexOR (Xiao et al., 2024) whose detailed
information is introduced in the Appendix A. Subsequently, 100 samples are randomly selected
from each dataset as the reserved test dataset. For datasets with fewer than 100 samples, all data are
used for testing. The remaining samples are used for data augmentation, ensuring a clear separation
between training and testing data. In the data augmentation process, LLMs effectively generate data
through prompt engineering (Tang et al., 2024; Luo et al., 2023). To build a high-quality dataset,
seven distinct instructions are applied to 1,763 seed problems. These instructions comprehensively
extend the original problems from various perspectives, such as modifying constraints, changing
scenarios, altering optimization types, and branching out from the original problem, among other
approaches. Finally, experts review the generated problems, removing those with unclear descrip-
tions or infeasible solutions to ensure data diversity and quality. Prompts are detailed in Appendix I.
Then, the labeling of optimization problems using five-element and solver code is performed by
experts. GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) is also used to generate labels with uncertain correctness, which
can be used in the model alignment. As shown in Figure 2(a), for each optimization problem p,
experts label the five-element formulationf and solver code s, and GPT-4 generates the formulation
f ′ and code s′, respectively. Since GPT-4 may produce errors, experts validate it and assign a
desirability label d′ to indicate whether GPT-4’s label is accurate (True) or not (False). This process
produces two types of labeled data: fully accurate formulations and solver codes, and those with
potential errors but validated by experts. The two kinds of data are well-suited for the processes of
multi-instruction supervised fine-tuning and model alignment, as discussed in the next section. The
detailed process of data labeling and augmentation is introduced in Appendix K.
3.3 L EARNING : M ULTI-I NSTRUCTION SFT AND MODEL ALIGNMENT
3.3.1 M ULTI-I NSTRUCTION SFT
Direct utilization of LLM to address optimization problems described in natural language often
results in inaccuracies, primarily due to their inability to comprehensively capture implicit informa-
tion. To address this issue, we enhance the capability to both define and solve the problems through
multi-instruction supervised fine-tuning (SFT).
The multi-instruction dataset DSFT = Df
SFT ∪ Ds
SFT, labeled by experts, is designed to improve both
the problem formulation and solving code generation abilities of LLM. The formulation dataset
Df
SFT = {(ui, vi)}Nf
i focuses on enhancing the LLM’s ability to accurately define general optimiza-
tion problems by providing data pairs (ui, vi), where ui represents a problem p after being applied
to a template, andvi is its corresponding five-element formulationf. Meanwhile, the solving dataset
Ds
SFT = {(ui, vi)}Ns
i focuses on improving the LLM’s ability to generate solver code. It contains
two types of data: in one, ui is the problem p and vi is the solver code s; in the other, ui is the
formulation f and vi is the solver code s. Both are aligned with the appropriate templates and all
the labels in DSFT are correctly labeled by experts. The instruction templates used in the learning
process are detailed in Appendix H, which provides a comprehensive explanation, including a more
in-depth description of the five-element to facilitate better understanding by the LLM.
Then, given the instruction u and its label v, the objective of SFT is to maximize the conditional
probability p(v | u). Assuming that p(v | u) =Q
i=1 p(vi | v0:i−1, u), this leads to minimizing the
negative log-likelihood:
LSFT(θ) = −E(u,v)∼DSFT
X
i=1
log π(vi | v0:i−1, u; θ) , (2)
where DSFT denotes the multi-instruction SFT dataset, which combines instructions from Df
SFT and
Ds
SFT to train the LLM in defining and solving optimization problems. π(·) represents the predicted
probability distribution of the LLM, and θ denotes its parameters.
3.3.2 M ODEL ALIGNMENT
Despite SFT training the model to learn how to write solving code, LLMs may still exhibit hal-
lucination when faced with novel problems. This hallucination manifests as outputs that appear
plausible but are, in fact, fabricated or inaccurate. To mitigate hallucinations, we incorporate model
5
=== PAGE 6 ===
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
alignment, which is not utilized by other learning-based methods. We use Kahneman-Tversky Op-
timization (KTO)(Ethayarajh et al., 2024) as our alignment method, as it avoids reward model bias
and mitigates the data demands of ranking-based approaches like PPO(Ouyang et al., 2022) and
DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023).
The KTO algorithm aligns the model using (instruction, completion, desirability) data, where desir-
ability reflects the correctness of the completion using a binary label: True or False. Specifically, the
dataset DKTO = {(ui, vi, di)}NKTO
i , used by KTO, contains GPT-4 completions with expert-assigned
desirability labels. The instructions ui in DKTO match those in DSFT, covering formulation and
code generation tasks. However, the completions vi, generated by GPT-4, do not always fulfill the
instructions ui correctly, and experts assign desirability labels di to achieve the model alignment.
Building upon the previous work by Rafailov et al. (2023), it is evident that the LLM can be inter-
preted as a reward function. Consequently, we can express the optimal reward for KTO as follows:
r∗
KTO(u, v) = β log π∗(v | u)
πref(v | u) . (3)
In this equation, r∗(·) denotes the optimal reward function of the completion v in response to the
instruction u, and π∗(·) represents the optimal model (i.e., the KTO model), πref(·) indicates the
reference model (i.e., the SFT model), and β serves as the scaling factor. This ratio measures the
relative confidence of the optimal model in generating v compared to the reference model.
Inspired by classic prospect theory (Tversky & Kahneman, 1992), the value function employs a lo-
gistic transformation on the adjusted ratio of log probabilities, thereby assessing the value of each
generation in terms of its desirability and the divergence of the policy from the reference. By sub-
stituting the exponential function with a sigmoid function, we derive the value function as follows:
ϕKTO(u, v; β) =

σ(rKTO(u, v) − zref) if d = True | u, v ,
σ(zref − rKTO(u, v)) if d = False | u, v , (4)
where zref is defined as the reference point, formulated as: zref = βKL(π∗(v′ | u) || πref(v′ | u)).
Another essential component of KTO loss is the weight function, which can be expressed as follows:
w(v) =

λD if d = True | u, v ,
λU if d = False | u, v . (5)
The weight function w(v) assigns weights to the loss depending on the desirability of the outcome
v, with λD and λU representing the weights for desirable and undesirable outcomes, respectively.
Finally, the KTO loss function is formulated as:
LKTO(π∗, πref) = E(u,v,d)∼DKTO[w(v)(1 − ϕKTO(u, v; β))] . (6)
The KTO loss function encourages the optimal model π∗ to produce completions that align more
closely with expert-labeled data, improving the overall optimization generalization of both problem
formulation and solver generation.
3.4 A UTO -T ESTING : F ORMULATION , S OLVING AND SELF -C ORRECTION
In the auto-testing process, first, the optimization problem is formulated using the five-element
framework based on its natural language description; second, the solver code is generated for the
five-element formulation and executed; finally, the solver’s running logs, including output results
and errors, are analyzed to determine whether self-correction is necessary. The auto-testing pro-
cess automates the entire workflow of problem definition and solver code generation, while also
integrating the self-correction mechanism for continuous improvement.
Inspired by Chen et al. (2024), to enhance optimization generalization, we implement self-correction
to automatically analyze the output results and identify errors arising during the execution of the
solver code. Specifically, the instruction is organized around the problem, the five-element formula-
tion, the solver code, and the execution output results, following a template outlined in Appendix H.
The self-correction LLM then determines whether further resolution is necessary or whether the
optimal solution has been achieved. If resolution is needed, the model generates an analysis with
suggestions and decides to return to whether the problem formulation step or the code generation
step. The self-correction mechanism ensures a more robust and adaptive optimization process, im-
proving optimization generalization especially in the accuracy of formulations and final solutions.
6
=== PAGE 7 ===
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
4 E XPERIMENT
To analyze the performance of LLMOPT, we conduct SFT and model alignment based on the open-
source LLM Qwen1.5-14B (Bai et al., 2023) and compare it with various learning-based and prompt-
based methods on extensive datasets. The experiments aim to answer four key questions below.
(Q1) Learning-based vs. Prompting-based Methods: What advantages do learning-based meth-
ods, such as LLMOPT, have over LLMs that rely solely on prompt engineering?
(Q2) Optimization Generalization (Accuracy and Generality): To what extent can LLMOPT
improve optimization generalization ability compared with existing methods?
(Q3) Importance of Problem Definition in LLMOPT: How does the proposed five-element for-
mulation as an intermediate step contribute to boost accuracy in solving optimization tasks?
(Q4) Effectiveness of Model Alignment in LLMOPT: How effective is model alignment in en-
hancing the solving accuracy of LLMs for optimization tasks?
The four questions are answered in order in the next sections which include a detailed introduction
to the experiments, followed by the analysis of results.
4.1 E XPERIMENTAL SETUP
The experiments are conducted on six real-world optimization and operation task datasets, namely
NL4Opt (Ramamonjison et al., 2021), Mamo (EasyLP and ComplexLP) (Huang et al., 2024), In-
dustryOR (Tang et al., 2024), NLP4LP (AhmadiTeshnizi et al., 2024), ComplexOR (Xiao et al.,
2024). These datasets encompass about 20 scenario and 7 types of optimization problems. Detailed
descriptions of these datasets are provided in Appendix A. Training and testing data are strictly sep-
arated. For the NL4Opt, Mamo (EasyLP and ComplexLP) datasets, we shuffle the original datasets
and randomly extract 100 data from each dataset as the test datasets, and the remaining data are used
as seed data for data augmentation. The IndustryOR dataset retains its original partitioning. Due to
the limited data in NLP4LP and ComplexOR, all data from these datasets are used for testing and
excluded from the training process.
In the experiment, we use three performance metrics to comprehensively evaluate the optimization
generalization of the algorithm, namely, Execution Rate (ER), Solving Accuracy (SA), and Average
Solving Times (AST) . Specifically, ER refers to the proportion of solutions whose code can run
without any errors and has running results output. SA refers to the proportion of solutions that
correctly solve the optimization problem, i.e., find the optimal solution. AST refers to the average
number of times the self-correction process is performed during the test. In our experiment, the
maximum number of self-correction re-solves is set to 12 times.
4.2 A NALYSIS OF OPTIMIZATION GENERALIZATION
In this section, we compare LLMOPT with prompt-based methods (Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023),
Chain-of-Experts (Xiao et al., 2024), OptiMUS (AhmadiTeshnizi et al., 2024)), learning-based
methods (ORLM (Tang et al., 2024) built on Mistral-7B, Deepseek-Math-7B-Base, LLaMa3-8B),
and GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023), demonstrating the optimization generalization capability of LLMOPT.
Table 1: Comparison of the SA metric between LLMOPT and learning-based methods. The results
for ORLM are cited from Tang et al. (2024). Underlined results indicate the previous SOTA, while
bold results indicate the current SOTA.
Datasets NL4Opt Mamo Easy Mamo Complex IndustryOR
GPT-4 Directly 47.3% 66.5% 14.6% 28.0%
ORLM
Mistral-7B 84.4% 81.4% 32.0% 27.0%
Deepseek-Math-7B-Base86.5% 82.2% 37.9% 33.0%
LLaMa3-8B 85.7% 82.3% 37.4% 38.0%
LLMOPT (Ours)Qwen1.5-14B 93.0% 97.0% 68.0% 46.0%
Improvement Rate↑ +6.5% +14.7% +30.1% +8.0%
7
=== PAGE 8 ===
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
NL4Opt Mamo E. Mamo C. IndustryOR NLP4LP ComplexOR0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%Solving Accuracy (SA)
81.0%
91.0%
34.0% 34.0% 32.4%
27.3%
88.0% 89.0%
46.0%
33.0%
54.1%
45.5%
(a) Comparison between GPT-4o and Qwen1.5-14B with only SFT. 
GPT-4o
Qwen1.5 with Only SFT
NL4Opt Mamo E. Mamo C. IndustryOR NLP4LP ComplexOR0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%Solving Accuracy (SA)
91.0% 96.0%
64.0%
41.0%
73.0% 72.7%
93.0% 97.0%
68.0%
46.0%
83.8%
72.7%
(b) Ablation of five-element. 
LLMOPT w/o 5-Element
LLMOPT
NL4Opt Mamo E. Mamo C. IndustryOR NLP4LP ComplexOR0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%Solving Accuracy (SA)
90.0%
97.0%
65.0%
43.0%
64.9%
54.6%
93.0% 97.0%
68.0%
46.0%
83.8%
72.7%
(c) Ablation of KTO. 
LLMOPT w/o KTO
LLMOPT
NL4Opt Mamo E. Mamo C. IndustryOR NLP4LP ComplexOR0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%Solving Accuracy (SA)
88.0% 89.0%
46.0%
33.0%
54.1%
45.5%
93.0% 97.0%
68.0%
46.0%
83.8%
72.7%
(d) Ablation of both five-element and KTO. 
LLMOPT w/o KTO & 5-Element
LLMOPT
Figure 3: The results of the SA metric. Sub-figure (a) compares the SA performance of GPT-4o
and the Qwen1.5-14B model with only SFT, showing the potential of learning-based methods. Sub-
figures (b), (c) and (d) perform ablation on five-element and KTO. The Mamo Easy and Mamo
Complex datasets are abbreviated as Mamo E. and Mamo C., due to space constraints.
Table 2: Comparison of the SA metric between LLMOPT and prompt-based methods. The results
for Reflexion, Chain-of-Experts, and OptiMUS are cited from Xiao et al. (2024). Underlinedresults
indicate the previous SOTA, whilebold results indicate the current SOTA.
Datasets NL4Opt NLP4LP ComplexOR
GPT-4 Directly 47.3% 35.8% 9.5%
Reflexion 53.0% 46.3% 19.1%
Chain-of-Experts 64.2% 53.1% 38.1%
OptiMUS 78.8% 72.0% 66.7%
LLMOPT (Ours) 93.0% 83.8% 72.7%
Improvement Rate↑ +14.2% +11.8% +6.0%
Learning-based vs. Prompting-based Methods (Answer to Q1). To demonstrate the potential of
the learning-based method, we perform SFT on Qwen1.5-14B Bai et al. (2023) and compare it with
GPT-4o using the same prompt (Appendix H). As shown in Figure 3(a), the results indicate that
LLM with only SFT can achieve comparable performance to GPT-4o. For the complete LLMOPT
(including model alignment and self-correction), as shown in Figure 4, LLMOPT outperforms both
GPT-4o and GPT-4-Turbo, achieving higher solving accuracy with fewer solving times across all six
datasets. All these results demonstrate the potential of learning-based methods.
Accuracy (Answer to Q2-1) . We compare the solving accuracy (SA) of LLMOPT with prompt-
based and learning-based methods as shown in Table 1 and 2, respectively. To ensure consistency
in reproduction, we only cite the results from the original paper. LLMOPT achieves state-of-the-art
(SOTA) performance in SA across six datasets, outperforming both prompt-based and learning-
based methods. Compared to learning-based methods, defining with the five-element formulation
and self-correction process improves the accuracy, with an average increase of 14.83% on four
datasets. For prompt-based methods, SFT and model alignment enhance the LLM’s ability to solve
optimization problems, yielding a 10.67% average improvement across three datasets. Overall,
LLMOPT improves SOTA performance by an average of 11.08% across the six datasets.
Generality (Answer to Q2-2) . To analyze the generality of LLMOPT on general optimization
problems, we conduct testing on six datasets, each covering diverse optimization types, such as
linear programming, nonlinear programming, integer programming, mixed-integer programming,
multi-objective optimization, and combinatorial optimization, as detailed in Appendix G. These
datasets span over 20 different fields, including agriculture, energy, and healthcare, as detailed in
Appendix F. LLMOPT achieves state-of-the-art results across all datasets including a variety of
optimization problems, demonstrating its generality. Appendix L shows the specific experimental
results by question types. Moreover, despite the absence of NLP4LP and ComplexOR data in the
8
=== PAGE 9 ===
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
1.0 3.0 5.0 7.0 9.0 11.0
Average Solving Times (AST)
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%Solving Accuracy (SA)
(a) Comparison with GPT-4o and GPT-4-Turbo. 
LLMOPT (Ours)
GPT-4o
GPT-4-Turbo
1.0 3.0 5.0 7.0 9.0 11.0
Average Solving Times (AST)
30%
44%
58%
72%
86%
100%Solving Accuracy (SA)
(b) Comparison with ablation versions. 
LLMOPT
w/o 5-Element
w/o KTO
w/o 5-Element & KTO
NL4Opt Mamo Easy Mamo Complex IndustryOR NLP4LP ComplexOR
Figure 4: Comparison of SA and AST between LLMOPT, GPT-4, and ablated versions.
Table 3: The ablation results of LLMOPT without (w/o) five-element formulation, KTO alignment
and self-correction, respectively. In the experiments without self-correction, the model is called only
once, resulting in an AST of 1.00. Bold indicates the best performance for each metric.
Metrics ER SA AST ER SA AST ER SA AST
Dataset NL4Opt Mamo Easy Mamo Complex
LLMOPT 99.0% 93.0% 3.07 100.0% 97.0% 1.70 97.0% 68.0% 6.30
w/o five-element99.0% 91.0% 2.95 100.0% 96.0% 2.36 98.0% 64.0% 6.38
w/o KTO 99.0% 90.0% 3.47 100.0% 97.0% 2.80 95.0% 65.0% 6.79
w/o self-correction79.0% 57.0% (1.00) 85.0% 71.0% (1.00) 52.0% 32.0% (1.00)
Dataset IndustryOR NLP4LP ComplexOR
LLMOPT 92.0% 46.0% 8.35 100.0% 83.8% 7.00 94.7% 72.7% 10.27
w/o five-element92.0% 41.0% 8.50 96.9% 73.0% 7.43 94.7% 72.7% 10.05
w/o KTO 92.0% 43.0% 8.88 89.2% 64.9% 8.32 100.0% 54.6% 10.84
w/o self-correction55.0% 31.0% (1.00) 47.7% 35.2% (1.00) 47.4% 18.2% (1.00)
training dataset, LLMOPT still achieves SOTA performance on them, as shown in Table 1, fur-
ther proving its generality. Furthermore, seven examples of the five-element formulation applied to
various optimization problems are provided in Appendix J to illustrate the generality of this defi-
nition. The high accuracy and generality demonstrate the optimization generalization capability of
LLMOPT.
4.3 A BLATION STUDY
In this section, we conduct comprehensive ablation experiments, including LLMOPT without five-
element formulation, without KTO alignment, and without self-correction. The results of these
experiments are shown in Figure 3, Figure 4, and Table 3. We also design detailed ablation experi-
ments on the self-correction mechanism, which are introduced in Appendix M.
Importance of Problem Definition (Answer to Q3). In order to explore the importance of problem
definition, we evaluate three metrics on the ablation experiments: Execution Rate (ER), Solving
Accuracy (SA), and Average Solving Time (AST). As detailed in Table 3 and Figure 3(b), these
results show that using the five-element formulation as the problem definition improves SA across
all six datasets. However, this definition can sometimes lower the ER, as the LLM may oversimplify
the problem without it, producing error-free but inaccurate code. In contrast, using the five-element
approach ensures correct code generation, improving SA at the cost of slightly reduced ER.
Effectiveness of Model Alignment (Answer to Q4) . Alignment typically enhances the efficiency
and effectiveness of LLMs on specific tasks. As shown in Figure 4(b) and 3(c), the ablation results
shows that KTO alignment not only significantly boosts SA but also reduces AST across all six
datasets. Furthermore, as shown in Figure 4(b), 3(d), and Table 3, the combination of five-element
and KTO alignment improves performance in terms of SA and AST on complex datasets.
9
=== PAGE 10 ===
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
5 D ISCUSSION
Attempt on Larger Models. To explore the potential for further performance improvement of LL-
MOPT on larger models, we deploy it on Qwen2-72B (Yang et al., 2024a). The detailed results
are provided in Appendix D. We conduct experiments on two complex task datasets, Mamo Com-
plex and IndustryOR, and the results show that LLMOPT based on Qwen2-72B shows significant
improvements in both SA and ER compared with its performance on Qwen1.5-14B. Given the trade-
off between performance and the costs of training and deployment, i.e., green computing issue, we
opt not to use larger models, since Qwen1.5-14B already achieves state-of-the-art performance.
Compared with OpenAI o1 Model . OpenAI o1 model (OpenAI, 2024) has recently garnered
attention for its strong reasoning ability. However, due to the limited availability of its API and
restrictions on the number of weekly trials, our evaluation of the o1 model’s performance is limited.
We conduct experiments on 10 easy and 10 complex problems from the Mamo Complex dataset.
With a single call, the o1 model successfully generated code to solve 7 easy problems and 5 complex
problems. These results suggest that the o1 model is more accurate in solving optimization problems
compared with GPT-4 series models. However, due to the lack of open access, the absence of
detailed technical specifications and training data description of o1, as well as the limitations on
usage and high costs, fine-tuning open-source large models with LLMOPT presents a more cost-
effective solution for achieving better optimization generalization in real industrial scenarios.
The Seesaw Issue of LLMs. The seesaw issue in LLMs refers to the trade-off between improving
the performance on specialized tasks and its generalization across diverse tasks, where gains in one
area often result in losses in another. To assess whether enhancing the LLM’s ability to define and
solve optimization problems affects its performance on other tasks, we compared the model’s per-
formance before and after fine-tuning across 10 general tasks, including math, code, classification,
information extraction, open QA, closed QA, text generation, brainstorming, rewriting and summa-
rization. The results indicate that the fine-tuned model showed performance improvements in 6 tasks
and declines in 4 tasks, with an average performance increase of 0.3% across all tasks. Importantly,
no significant trade-off or seesaw effect is observed. Detailed results are provided in Appendix E.
About High-Quality Training Data. High-quality data are crucial for fine-tuning LLMs (Villalo-
bos et al., 2024). Accurate and diverse training data allow the model to improve its task-specific
performance. However, optimization problem data described in natural language are relatively
scarce. Although we have collected as many optimization problem datasets as possible, which are
detailed in Appendix A, these datasets often lack high-quality labels. For instance, in the IndustryOR
dataset (Tang et al., 2024), some data have incorrectly labeled optimal solutions, and the NL4Opt
dataset (Ramamonjison et al., 2021) does not provide optimal solution annotations but only entity
labels. This highlights the scarcity of optimization problems training data. Although prompt engi-
neering for data augmentation is employed in this work, expert labeling remains a time-consuming
and labor-intensive process. Efficiently gathering, synthesizing and generating more diverse and
well-labeled high-quality data remains an issue that cannot be ignored in this research direction in
future. Moreover, for large-scale problems, data are typically stored in specific databases or files
rather than extracted from natural language descriptions. The understanding of these data structures
remains a new topic that requires further exploration.
6 C ONCLUSION
This paper focuses on the challenge of optimization generalization in LLMs, including the accuracy
in solving optimization problems and the generality of the problem types that LLMs can handle. We
propose a learning-based framework called LLMOPT, which significantly improves LLMs’ ability
to define and solve general optimization problems through multi-instruction supervised fine-tuning
and model alignment. LLMOPT introduces the five-element formulation as a universal definition for
various types of optimization problems to enhance solving accuracy. LLMOPT is extensively eval-
uated on a wide range of optimization tasks. It achieves state-of-the-art optimization generalization
ability across all of them, i.e., a notable 11.08% average solving accuracy improvement.
10
=== PAGE 11 ===
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
