

=== Page 1 ===

LLMS TEER : Improving Long-Context LLM
Inference by Steering Attention on Reused Contexts
Zhuohan Gu∗
University of Chicago
zhuohan@uchicago.edu
Jiayi Yao∗
University of Chicago
jiayi3@uchicago.edu
Kuntai Du
University of Chicago
kuntai@uchicago.edu
Junchen Jiang
University of Chicago
junchenj@uchicago.edu
Abstract
As large language models (LLMs) show impressive performance on complex tasks,
they still struggle with longer contextual understanding and high computational
costs. To balance efficiency and quality, we introduceLLMS TEER , a fine-tuning-
free framework that enhances LLMs through query-independent attention steering.
Tested on popular LLMs and datasets, LLMS TEER narrows the performance gap
with baselines by 65.9% and reduces the runtime delay by up to 4.8× compared to
recent attention steering methods.
1 Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in complex tasks such
as question answering, summarization, and reasoning ( llm [a,b,c]). To enhance their reliability,
LLMs are often augmented with domain-specific or user-specific knowledge that extends beyond
their inherent training data ( Lewis et al. [2020], Jiang et al. [2023], Chen et al. [2024]). However,
incorporating these supplemental contexts, which can exceed thousands of tokens ( Jin et al. [2024],
Gao et al. [2023]), presents two challenges: (1) models often struggle to comprehend long context
(e.g., lost-in-the-middle problem ( Liu et al. [2023a], Junqing et al. [2023])) and (2) processing long
context incurs substantial runtime costs (Liu et al. [2024], Lin et al. [2024], Zhong et al. [2024]).
Since the Key-Value (KV) cache of the same context text chunks is often reused multiple times (Liu
et al. [2023b], Yao et al. [2024], Jin et al. [2024]), many recent systems adopt prefix caching (Jin
et al. [2024], Liu et al. [2023b], Qin et al. [2024]), which stores the KV caches for the frequently
reused contexts such that LLMs no longer need to prefill these contexts repeatedly. However, the
model persists in losing track of key information from the context as its KV pairs remain unchanged.
So, is there a way to simultaneously achieve high efficiency and high quality without fine-tuning
models?
We present LLMS TEER , a pioneering, fine-tuning-free framework that efficiently improves the
generation quality of models through post-hoc attention steering. More specifically, LLMS TEER
reweights attention scores to steer the model’s attention toward selected tokens, thereby improving its
contextual understanding. Our insight comes from the fact that storing and reusing the KV cache
offers an opportunity to modify the KV cache offline to improve the model’s understanding regarding
the context. Thus, all queries could benefit from this improvement as the process of modifying the
KV cache of the preceding context is independent of the queries. LLMS TEER enables LLMs to read
∗Equal contribution.
Machine Learning for Systems Workshop at the 38 th Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems (NeurIPS 2024).
arXiv:2411.13009v2  [cs.LG]  21 Nov 2024

=== Page 2 ===

the same context in different ways by leveraging the idea that each pass through the same context with
different prefix prompts leads the model to generate distinct KV caches, which represent different
understandings of the context.
We implemented LLMS TEER on top of LLaMA-3.1-8b-Instruct ( Dubey et al. [2024]), and compared
LLMS TEER with LLaMA-3.1-8b-Instruct, LLaMA-3.1-70b-Instruct ( Dubey et al. [2024]) and
the state-of-the-art attention steering baseline. LLMS TEER demonstrates that by steering tokens
that are consistently important across the model’s understandings, it not only achieves a significant
increase in F1 scores (e.g., 72.9 -> 82.0), but also delivers up to 4.8× faster compared to the baselines.
LLMS TEER not only reduces runtime costs but also improves generation quality. This paper is the
first effort to (1) improve model generation quality without fine-tuning and (2) do so in a way that is
compatible with prefix caching.
2 Post-hoc attention steering
Attention steering didn’t come out of nowhere. Methods like PASTA ( Zhang et al. [2023]) and
AutoPASTA ( Anonymous [2024]) introduce techniques to boost the generation quality of LLMs by
guiding their attention to specific parts of the input text. In PASTA, users manually specify tokens
in the input and steer the LLM’s attention toward these highlighted tokens through reweighting.
However, annotating relevant input spans by humans is not always feasible, especially for lengthy
contexts and context-specific tasks.
AutoPASTA enhances PASTA by automating the process of identifying key contextual information
through iterative prompting. More specifically, AutoPASTA directly prompts the LLM to generate
the key sentence in the context based on the query, and then upweight the attention scores of tokens
in the key sentence. Despite its potential in improving model’s generation quality, AutoPASTA has
several limitations.
First, the iterative prompting approach necessitates two LLM calls, which increases runtime latency.
Second, AutoPASTA is incompatible with prefix caching, a technique in which KV caches of the
frequently used text chunks are stored and reused such that the prefill of the reused text chunks can be
skipped. For example, Llama-8B ( Dubey et al. [2024]) requires 2.04 seconds to process a 5000-token
context using 2 A40 GPUs. However, if the KV cache of the text chunk is precomputed and stored,
only the final user query needs to be prefilled, which only takes 0.039 seconds on the same hardware.
Although prefix caching can still be applied to the initial call in AutoPASTA, the second call cannot
benefit from prefix caching in that the attention of the context is steered in a query-dependent way.
Consequently, the KV cache of the context will be altered and can no longer be reused across different
queries.
3 LLMS TEER design
We now present the design of LLMS TEER , which not only reduces runtime costs but also improves
inference quality. We begin with the basic insight, followed by howLLMS TEER selects and steers
tokens.
Basic insight: When an LLM processes a context in a single pass, some tokens may not receive
sufficient attention. By prompting the LLM to read the context multiple times, each with a different
prefix prompt and thus a different KV cache, we hypothesize that tokens with consistently high
attention scores across these KV caches are the ones requiring more attention.
Text 
Chunks
Prefix 
prompt 1
Text 
Chunks
Prefix 
prompt 2
Prefill
Identify the
top 𝑘tokens
Layer 𝒊
Prefill
𝐂𝐨𝐧𝐭𝐞𝐱𝐭𝐮𝐚𝐥	𝐫𝐞−𝐫𝐞𝐚𝐝𝐢𝐧𝐠
Identify the
top 𝑘tokens
Selected tokens
Steer
KV 
Cache 1
KV 
Cache 2
Figure 1: LLMS TEER system in an LLM inference workflow processes the same context twice using
different prefix prompts to generate key-value caches. It then reweights the selected tokens.
2

=== Page 3 ===

Key components: LLMS TEER consists of three high-level steps. First, it prompts the LLM to
process the context text chunks twice, each time using a different prefix prompt. This approach
leverages the insight that varying the prefix prompt influences how the LLM interprets the context.
Second, at each layer, it computes the cumulative attention scores for each head, selecting the top k
tokens based on these scores across all heads. It then identifies tokens that rank highly in both the
first and second passes. Finally, it scales up the attention weight of selected tokens. An illustrative
overview of LLMS TEER is shown in Figure 1 and the corresponding algorithm can be found in §A.2.
Contextual re-reading: In this step, LLMS TEER prompts the LLM to process the same context
twice, each time using a distinct prefix prompt. The goal is to force the model to read the context in
two different ways. The prefix prompts do not include the query itself because we want to ensure
that the context is read in a non-query-dependent manner. This allows the model to capture general
context-related information without bias toward a specific query. More importantly, given a fixed
context C and a sequence of queries, our method makes the prefix cache reusable across all queries
and reduces the need to call the LLM twice for each query during online inference.
Token selection: For each pass, we store the cumulative attention scores of the prefix prompt and
context tokens at each layer and each head. For simplicity, we will ignore indices for layers and heads.
Specifically, for each layer and each head, consider the input prompt tensor X ∈ RL×D, where L
denotes the input prompt length and D represents the model’s hidden dimension. The attention matrix
is computed as:
A = sof tmax
 QK⊤
√
D

∈ RL×L,
where Q = XWQ and K = XWK. Here, WQ, WK ∈ RD×D are learned weight matrices that
project the input prompt X into query and key spaces. Let Lp denote the combined length of the
prefix prompt and context. The attention matrix for the prefix prompt and context tokens is:
Ap = A[: Lp, : Lp] ∈ RLp×Lp .
To compute the cumulative attention scores, we sum the attention weights across each column of the
attention matrix. This summation gives us the total attention that each token has received from all
preceding tokens:
As =
Lp−1X
i=0
Ap[i, :] ∈ RLp ,
where As(i) is the cumulative attention score for token i, representing the total attention received by
token i from all preceding tokens.
We then store the cumulative attention scores from all heads and layers along with their corresponding
indices for further processing. To determine which tokens to steer, we first sort the cumulative
attention scores for each layer across all heads and identify the top k tokens for that layer. Next, we
find the intersection of these top-ranked tokens from both passes, selecting those that consistently
rank high in both. These selected tokens are then upweighted.
Steering: In the steering phase, for each layer, LLMS TEER adjusts the attention mechanism by
applying a weighting matrix, denoted as M, which scales the attention scores for the selected tokens.
Initially, we define M ∈ RL×L, where L is the input prompt length, as a tensor filled with ones.
For the selected tokens at each layer, we update the corresponding entries in M using a predefined
scaling factor, α. We then expand M across the batch and head dimensions to align with the shape
of the attention weights, creating a tensor of shape R1×H×L×L, where H represents the number of
attention heads. Finally, we apply this weighting matrix element-wise to the original attention scores
at each layer, effectively steering the attention toward the selected tokens:
Asteered = M ⊙ A,
where ⊙ denotes element-wise multiplication and A represents the original attention matrix.
4 Evaluation
4.1 Setup
Datasets: Our evaluation covers three datasets: SQuAD ( Rajpurkar et al. [2016]), TriviaQA ( Joshi
et al. [2017]) and GSM8K ( Cobbe et al. [2021]). SQuAD is a reading comprehension dataset with
3

=== Page 4 ===

Better Better Better
Figure 2: End-to-end Delay vs. Generation Quality. We assume KV cache is already in GPU memory
when the request is being served.
questions based on Wikipedia articles. TriviaQA is a large reading comprehension dataset, requiring
reasoning across multiple sentences. GSM8K is a collection of diverse grade school math word
problems designed for multi-step reasoning. For each dataset, we randomly sample 100 test cases.
We use F1-score as the quality metric and request delay (in seconds) as the efficiency metric across
all datasets.
LLMS TEER setting: We apply LLMS TEER to Llama-8B, using an attention scaling factor α. The
two prefix prompts we used to generate different KV cache are provided in §A.1. Following the
AutoPASTA paper, we adopt coarse-to-fine model profiling onLLMS TEER to search for the optimal
set of layers and heads to steer that yields the most quality improvement.
Baselines: We compare LLMS TEER with three baselines: Llama-8B, Llama-70B (8-bit quantized)
and Llama-8B with AutoPASTA. We also adopt coarse-to-fine model profiling on AutoPASTA. We
assume prefix caching is enabled. That is, the KV cache of the prefix instruction and the context is
pre-computed and has already been loaded to GPU memory when the request arrives.
Implementation: We build LLMS TEER and all the baselines on top of Huggingface Transformers
( Wolf et al. [2020]). We implement AutoPASTA based on their paper as the code is not public yet.
All experiments are conducted on two NVIDIA A40 GPUs.
4.2 Results
Reduced request delay: As shown in Figure 2, LLMS TEER consistently achieves request delays
close to the 8B baseline across all datasets. On the SQuAD, TriviaQA, and GSM8K datasets,
LLMS TEER ’s request delay is nearly negligible compared to the 8B baseline. Compared to the
70B model, LLMS TEER is able to reduce request delay by 7.1–7.5 ×. Compared to AutoPASTA,
LLMS TEER can still reduce the request delay by 1.4–4.8×.
Higher quality: Figure 2 demonstrates the high generation quality of LLMS TEER across all three
datasets. On the SQuAD dataset, LLMS TEER increases the F1 score by approximately 10% over
the LLaMA-8B model with prefix caching and by about 7% over AutoPASTA. This improvement
continues on the TriviaQA dataset, whereLLMS TEER achieves a similar F1 score increase, surpassing
the 8B model by 12.5% and AutoPASTA by 11.4%. While our method does not outperform the 70B
model on the SQuAD and TriviaQA datasets, it closely approaches the performance of the larger
model without the substantial delay associated with the larger model. Notably, on the GSM8K dataset,
our method even exceeds the performance of the 70B model.
Understanding LLMS TEER ’s improvement: Unlike AutoPASTA,LLMS TEER steers attention
without relying on query information, operating with less information yet achieving superior per-
formance. We test a query-dependent version of LLMS TEER and observe smaller improvements
compared to our query-independent method, suggesting that effective attention steering can be
achieved without incorporating query information.
5 Limitations and Future work
We plan to extend to longer context lengths (e.g., >10k tokens) to fully explore LLMS TEER ’s
capabilities and to test it on models beyond Llama-8B to assess generalizability. We will also
4

=== Page 5 ===

conducting an ablation study to quantify the contributions of the steering mechanism versus contextual
re-reading. We will explore the limitations and capabilities of our method compared to traditional fine-
tuning, especially considering context window length and model reasoning capabilities. Additionally,
PagedAttention (Kwon et al. [2023]) and FlashAttention (Dao et al. [2022]) could enhance efficiency.
Investigating more fine-grained steering at the granularity of individual token pairs, beyond our current
token-level attention upweighting, may further improve generation quality and will be explored in
future work.
6 Conclusion
We introduce LLMS TEER , a novel attention steering method aimed to improve the generation quality
of LLMs by allowing the model to review the context multiple times. Specifically, LLMS TEER
narrows the response quality gap between small and large LLMs by 65.9% and deliver the responses
faster by 4.8× compared to the state-of-the-art attention steering baseline.
References
Applications of large language models - indata labs. https://indatalabs.com/blog/
large-language-model-apps , a. (Accessed on 09/21/2023).
12 Practical Large Language Model (LLM) Applications - Techopedia. https://www.
techopedia.com/12-practical-large-language-model-llm-applications , b. (Ac-
cessed on 09/21/2023).
7 top large language model use cases and applications. https://www.projectpro.io/
article/large-language-model-use-cases-and-applications/887 , c. (Accessed on
09/21/2023).
Anonymous. Model tells itself where to attend: Faithfulness meets automatic attention steering. In
Submitted to ACL Rolling Review - June 2024, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
id=vFf7ZDoLA2. under review.
Jiawei Chen, Hongyu Lin, Xianpei Han, and Le Sun. Benchmarking large language models in
retrieval-augmented generation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
volume 38, pages 17754–17762, 2024.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John
Schulman. Training verifiers to solve math word problems, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2110.14168.
Tri Dao, Dan Fu, Stefano Ermon, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré. Flashattention: Fast and memory-
efficient exact attention with io-awareness. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
35:16344–16359, 2022.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.
Yunfan Gao, Yun Xiong, Xinyu Gao, Kangxiang Jia, Jinliu Pan, Yuxi Bi, Yi Dai, Jiawei Sun, and
Haofen Wang. Retrieval-augmented generation for large language models: A survey. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2312.10997, 2023.
Zhengbao Jiang, Frank F Xu, Luyu Gao, Zhiqing Sun, Qian Liu, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Yiming Yang,
Jamie Callan, and Graham Neubig. Active retrieval augmented generation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.06983, 2023.
Chao Jin, Zili Zhang, Xuanlin Jiang, Fangyue Liu, Xin Liu, Xuanzhe Liu, and Xin Jin. Ragcache:
Efficient knowledge caching for retrieval-augmented generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.12457,
2024.
5

=== Page 6 ===

Mandar Joshi, Eunsol Choi, Daniel S. Weld, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Triviaqa: A large scale distantly
supervised challenge dataset for reading comprehension, 2017. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
1705.03551.
He Junqing, Pan Kunhao, Dong Xiaoqun, Song Zhuoyang, Liu Yibo, Liang Yuxin, Wang Hao, Sun
Qianguo, Zhang Songxin, Xie Zejian, et al. Never lost in the middle: Improving large language
models via attention strengthening question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.09198, 2023.
Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph
Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. Efficient memory management for large language model
serving with pagedattention. In Proceedings of the 29th Symposium on Operating Systems
Principles, pages 611–626, 2023.
Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal,
Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, et al. Retrieval-augmented genera-
tion for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
9459–9474, 2020.
Bin Lin, Tao Peng, Chen Zhang, Minmin Sun, Lanbo Li, Hanyu Zhao, Wencong Xiao, Qi Xu, Xiafei
Qiu, Shen Li, et al. Infinite-llm: Efficient llm service for long context with distattention and
distributed kvcache. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.02669, 2024.
Nelson F. Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paranjape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni,
and Percy Liang. Lost in the middle: How language models use long contexts, 2023a. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.03172.
Xiaoran Liu, Qipeng Guo, Yuerong Song, Zhigeng Liu, Kai Lv, Hang Yan, Linlin Li, Qun Liu, and
Xipeng Qiu. Farewell to length extrapolation, a training-free infinite context with finite attention
scope. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.15176, 2024.
Yuhan Liu, Hanchen Li, Kuntai Du, Jiayi Yao, Yihua Cheng, Yuyang Huang, Shan Lu, Michael
Maire, Henry Hoffmann, Ari Holtzman, et al. Cachegen: Fast context loading for language model
applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07240, 2023b.
Ruoyu Qin, Zheming Li, Weiran He, Mingxing Zhang, Yongwei Wu, Weimin Zheng, and Xinran Xu.
Mooncake: Kimi’s kvcache-centric architecture for llm serving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.00079,
2024.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and Percy Liang. Squad: 100,000+ questions for
machine comprehension of text, 2016. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1606.05250.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick von
Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, Mariama
Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander M. Rush. Transformers: State-of-the-art natural language
processing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing: System Demonstrations, pages 38–45, Online, October 2020. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.emnlp-demos.6.
Jiayi Yao, Hanchen Li, Yuhan Liu, Siddhant Ray, Yihua Cheng, Qizheng Zhang, Kuntai Du, Shan Lu,
and Junchen Jiang. Cacheblend: Fast large language model serving with cached knowledge fusion.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.16444, 2024.
Qingru Zhang, Chandan Singh, Liyuan Liu, Xiaodong Liu, Bin Yu, Jianfeng Gao, and Tuo Zhao. Tell
your model where to attend: Post-hoc attention steering for llms, 2023. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2311.02262.
Yinmin Zhong, Shengyu Liu, Junda Chen, Jianbo Hu, Yibo Zhu, Xuanzhe Liu, Xin Jin, and Hao
Zhang. Distserve: Disaggregating prefill and decoding for goodput-optimized large language
model serving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.09670, 2024.
6

=== Page 7 ===

A Appendix / supplemental material
A.1 Prefix prompts
Prefix Prompts:
Prefix prompt 1:  Answer the question based on the given passages. Onlygive me the answer and do not output any other words.Thefollowing are given passages.
Prefix prompt 2: Respond to the query using only the provided texts. Only return the answer. DO NOT return any extra words. Below are the provided texts.
Figure 3: The two prefix prompts used in LLMS TEER to generate different key-value caches. By
processing the same context with these varied prefixes,LLMS TEER encourages the model to interpret
the context differently in each pass.
A.2 LLMS TEER Algorithm
Algorithm 1 LLMS TEER
Input A context C, a set of queries {q1, q2, . . . , qn}, an LLM L, prefix prompts P1, P2, and a scaling
factor α.
1: Contextual re-reading: Ai = AttentionL(Pi ⊕ C) for i ∈ {1, 2};
2: Token selection: T (l) = T2
i=1 TopK(P
h Al,h
i , k), where l denotes the layer and h denotes the
attention head;
3: Steering: Asteered = M ⊙ A, where M denotes a weighting matrix;
Output Modified attention weights for context C: Asteered
7