

=== Page 1 ===

Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies
(V olume 1: Long Papers), pages 9409–9426
April 29 - May 4, 2025 ©2025 Association for Computational Linguistics
MASTER: A Multi-Agent System with LLM Specialized MCTS
Bingzheng Gan1, Yufan Zhao1, Tianyi Zhang1, Jing Huang1, Yusu Li1
Shu Xian Teo1, Changwang Zhang1, Wei Shi1
1Huawei Technologies, Co., Ltd.
{gan.bingzheng,zhao.yufan1,zhang.tianyi,huangjing114,liyusu,
teo.shu.xian,zhangchangwang,w.shi}@huawei.com
Abstract
Large Language Models (LLM) are increas-
ingly being explored for problem-solving tasks.
However, their strategic planning capability is
often viewed with skepticism. Recent studies
have incorporated the Monte Carlo Tree Search
(MCTS) algorithm to augment the planning ca-
pacity of LLM. Despite its potential, MCTS
relies on extensive sampling simulations to ap-
proximate the true reward distribution, which
leads to two primary issues. Firstly, MCTS is
effective for tasks like the Game of Go, where
simulation results can yield objective rewards
(e.g., 1 for a win and 0 for a loss). However,
for tasks such as question answering, the result
of a simulation is the answer to the question,
which cannot yield an objective reward without
the ground truth. Secondly, obtaining statisti-
cally significant reward estimations typically re-
quires a sample size exceeding 30 simulations,
resulting in excessive token usage and time
consumption. To address these challenges, we
present the Multi-Agent System with Tactical
Execution and Reasoning using LLM Special-
ized MCTS ( MASTER), a novel framework
that coordinates agent recruitment and commu-
nication through LLM specialized MCTS. This
system autonomously adjusts the number of
agents based on task complexity and ensures
focused communication among them. Com-
prehensive experiments across various tasks
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
framework. It achieves 76% accuracy on Hot-
potQA and 80% on WebShop, setting new state-
of-the-art performance on these datasets.
1 Introduction
LLM represent a significant milestone in artifi-
cial intelligence and are increasingly employed
in problem-solving tasks (Xi et al., 2023). How-
ever, their application to complex problems is often
limited due to concerns about their planning capa-
bilities. LLM generate text based on "next token
probability" conditioned on the context (Vaswani
et al., 2017; Huang et al., 2023), but effective rea-
soning requires rigorous deduction rooted in the
first principles of logic, grounded in data and reality
(Valmeekam et al., 2023).
To enhance the planning capabilities of LLM,
recent studies have incorporated the MCTS algo-
rithm (Hao et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2024; Wang
et al., 2024). MCTS uses simulations to evaluate
the long-term consequences of actions, backpropa-
gating aggregated rewards up the tree. This allows
for backtracking to previous states based on esti-
mated future potential, striking a balance between
exploitation and exploration. However, the use of
MCTS in existing works presents two significant
challenges:
1. It relies on objective criteria from the ex-
ternal environment to obtain simulation re-
wards, which are not always available (e.g.,
in question-answering tasks where the cor-
rectness of an answer cannot be determined
without ground truth);
2. It requires numerous simulations to obtain sta-
tistically significant rewards, which can be
unsustainable due to the time and token costs.
To tackle the first challenge, certain approach
compares the outcomes of simulations with the
ground truth to derive objective rewards (Zhou
et al., 2024) which is flawed because revealing
the ground truth during problem-solving is inap-
propriate. In addressing the second challenge, they
limit the number of simulations (Hao et al., 2023)
or terminate the process once a correct answer is
identified (Zhou et al., 2024). Yet, this early termi-
nation approach is not feasible if the ground truth
remains undisclosed.
These issues highlight a critical step of MCTS:
simulation. Due to these limitations, MCTS is con-
strained to a narrow scope of application and is not
9409

=== Page 2 ===

fully compatible with LLM. Consequently, we pro-
pose an adaptation of MCTS tailored to LLM sce-
narios. Instead of performing limited simulations
with uncertain rewards, we eliminate the simula-
tion process, relying on the LLM’s self-evaluation
capabilities to allocate rewards. Additionally, we
propose several methods to enhance the objectivity
of rewards: 1). An additional step is introduced
for the LLM to provide more context before self-
evaluation; 2). The LLM’s confidence is incor-
porated as a weight for the reward to regulate its
influence; 3). The backpropagation mechanism is
retained, allowing for rewards updates if initially
misallocated. While traditional MCTS focuses re-
sources on simulations for an approximate reflec-
tion of reality, our approach distributes resources
across multiple steps to jointly ensure the accuracy
and objectivity of rewards. This is why we named
our project MASTER, as it replaces simulation, the
core procedure of MCTS, by mastering a series of
refined designs.
Another contribution of this paper is the introduc-
tion of a novel multi-agent system. Current multi-
agent systems feature two prominent frameworks:
the first allows agents to be independently created
and to share ideas freely. While versatile, this open
communication can lead to off-topic discussions
due to hallucinations (Lin et al., 2024; Hong et al.,
2023; Xi et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024a), divert-
ing focus from the main task and depleting the
token window length for extended conversation his-
tory. The second approach involves human-created
agents, where communication is predefined. Al-
though more controlled, this approach lacks code
reusability (Chu et al., 2023). Additionally, since
the procedures are established, it cannot adapt to
tasks of varying difficulty. It struggles with unan-
ticipated complex tasks on the one hand and spends
unnecessary resources on easy tasks on the other.
Our system, MASTER, addresses these limita-
tions by employing LLM-specialized MCTS to
guide the creation and interaction of agents. In
this system, child agents respond to and build upon
the outputs of the parent agent, making recruit-
ment and communication more manageable and
efficient. The system dynamically scales the num-
ber of agents based on task complexity, ensuring
flexibility. Although the agents share similar pro-
files, they assume different roles by taking distinct
actions. Unlike the nodes in LATS (Zhou et al.,
2024) and RAP (Hao et al., 2023), which represent
states on a reasoning tree and are closely tied to
specific tasks, our agents are task-agnostic and do
not require reconfiguration when the task changes.
In summary, our key contributions are:
1. We propose a novel Multi-Agent System
with Tactical Execution and Reasoning us-
ing LLM Specialized MCTS (MASTER), a
novel multi-agent framework that employs a
new agent recruitment process and communi-
cation protocol based on the MCTS algorithm.
The system autonomously adjusts the number
of agents according to task complexity and
mitigates distractions and shortage of token
window during agent communication.
2. We introduce a modified version of MCTS tai-
lored to LLM. This adaptation is suitable for
tasks where the environment does not provide
objective feedback, addressing a limitation of
the original MCTS. This revised MCTS is im-
plemented within our MASTER framework.
3. We conduct comprehensive experiments ac-
cross diverse tasks, including Question An-
swering (HotpotQA), Decision Making (Web-
Shop), and Programming (MBPP). It achieves
76% accuracy on HotpotQA and 80% on Web-
Shop, setting new SOTA on these datasets.
2 Related Work
Many studies have been done to enhance the plan-
ning capabilities of LLM. Among these efforts,
two primary planning approaches have emerged for
agents: Single-Path Planning and Tree-Based Plan-
ning. In the context of multi-agent systems, current
frameworks predominantly employ either Prede-
fined Frameworks or Open Frameworks depending
on their agent communication patterns. We discuss
some of the relevant works in this section.
2.1 Planning Processes
2.1.1 Single-Path Planning
In single-path planning, the LLM follows one tra-
jectory at a time, without branching into multiple
possibilities. Early examples include Few-Shot
Prompting (Brown et al., 2020), where the LLM
is guided by examples of completed tasks, and
Chain of Thought approaches (Wei et al., 2022;
Kojima et al., 2023; Ning et al., 2024), which re-
quire the LLM to reason step-by-step, maintaining
a linear trajectory throughout the process. Zhang et
al. introduce a structured meta-prompt with place-
holders for the LLM to complete (Zhang et al.,
9410

=== Page 3 ===

Regular Agent
Terminal Agent 
failed Evaluation
Regular Agent 
selected at this step
Regular Agent 
expanded at this step
Backpropagate:
Update the value and 
visits of agents on route 
to the terminal agent.
Thought
Action
Use the LLM for reasoning    
and action selection 
ObservationExecute an action with 
tools and observe output
Validation
Assessment
Use the LLM to validate 
facts in the solution
Use the LLM to estimate the 
initial reward for the solution
Evaluation
Use the LLM to evaluate the 
answer (Terminal Agent)
Solution
Context
Parent Agent
Child Agent
Expansion from 
Selected Agent
Agent2
UCT: 0.674
Agent5
UCT: 0.8
Agent6
UCT: 0.9
Agent0
UCT: 0.3
Agent1
UCT: 0.7 → 0.529
Agent3
UCT: 0.174
Agent4
UCT: 0.484
Terminal Agent 
passed Evaluation
Expansion Backpropagation
Figure 1: Reasoning Tree of MASTER. Starting from Agent0, Agent1 and Agent2 are created in the first expansion.
Then the system first selects Agent1 for expansion due to its higher UCT. Its child agent Agent3 is a terminal agent
that failed evaluation which triggers a backpropagation and lowers the UCT of Agent1. Now Agent2 has the highest
UCT and is selected for next expansion. Its child agent, Agent6 is a terminal agent and passes evaluation. The
answer in it is the final answer.
2024c) while Suzgun and Kala provide task-related
information to guide the model’s path (Suzgun and
Kalai, 2024). Single-path planning also benefits
from external feedback to refine solutions. ReAct
(Yao et al., 2023b) integrates feedback from the
environment, and Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023)
supplements this with verbal reasoning based on
the received feedback. Chen et al. use outputs and
error messages from a code interpreter to assist
the LLM in debugging (Chen et al., 2024c), while
Qiu et al. leverage outputs from a symbolic inter-
preter to enhance the LLM’s inductive reasoning
capabilities (Qiu et al., 2024).
2.1.2 Tree-Based Planning
In complex problem-solving, it is often benefi-
cial to explore multiple thought trajectories and
backtrack as needed. Tree-based planning or-
ganizes these thoughts into a tree structure, on
which a search algorithm is applied. For exam-
ple, BFS/DFS is employed in the Tree of Thoughts
(Yao et al., 2023a). RAP (Hao et al., 2023) and
LATS (Zhou et al., 2024) utilize MCTS to approxi-
mate reality and support the LLM’s reasoning pro-
cesses. However, how much the simulation process
contributes to their success remains uncertain due
to those two issues mentioned in Introduction sec-
tion. To address the first challenge, RAP prompts
the LLM with "Is this reasoning step correct?" and
uses the next-word probability of "yes" as a reward,
thus leveraging the LLM’s evaluation capabilities
without relying on external criteria. For the second
challenge, RAP reduces costs by performing only
one simulation. From a mathematical perspective,
it is questionable that one simulation can accurately
approximate the real reward. Some methods stop
simulations once a correct answer is found. How-
ever, this early termination mechanism is unavail-
able if the ground truth is not revealed.
2.2 Multi-Agent Systems
2.2.1 Predefined Framework
In predefined frameworks, the recruitment and com-
munication of agents are structured in advance. For
instance, ChatDev (Qian et al., 2023) and MetaGPT
(Hong et al., 2023), both tailored for software devel-
opment, rely on predefined workflows. Similarly,
AutoAgents (Chen et al., 2024a), a framework de-
signed for automatic agent generation, follows a
predefined structure. These frameworks have been
criticized for their heavy dependence on upfront
planning and their lack of flexibility in responding
to changing requirements (Pargaonkar, 2023).
2.2.2 Open Framework
Conversely, open frameworks offer greater flexibil-
ity, allowing agents to interact more dynamically.
For example, AgentVerse (Chen et al., 2024b) re-
9411

=== Page 4 ===

cruits agents with the freedom to communicate
openly, while CAMEL (Li et al., 2023) explores
a two-agent system. Additionally, AutoGen (Wu
et al., 2023) facilitates next-generation LLM ap-
plications by enabling multi-agent conversations,
allowing for adaptive and context-aware interac-
tions. As noted by Wei et al., effective multi-agent
collaboration in these open frameworks requires
autonomous systems to regulate communication,
ensuring that agents know when and with whom to
interact to avoid the exchange of irrelevant infor-
mation which is challenging for these frameworks
(Wei et al., 2023).
3 Methodology
3.1 Preliminaries
Before introducing our framework, we present
MCTS to clarify the motivation behind our work.
MCTS (Coulom, 2006) is a widely used planning
algorithm and famously employed in AlphaGo (Sil-
ver et al., 2016). Taking the Game of Go as an
example, the algorithm assists in selecting the best
possible action in the current state of the board
based on their average rewards. These rewards are
obtained through numerous simulations. For in-
stance, consider the current state where action a1
is chosen as the next move. The game then pro-
ceeds to completion, with all subsequent actions,
whether by our side or the opponent, determined
by a policy model rather than a real player. The
entire game sequence constitutes one simulation of
actiona1. If we win, the reward is 1; otherwise, it
is 0. Specifically, if we simulate 10 games from
the current state with actiona1 and win 9 of them,
the average reward fora1 would be 0.9. However,
due to the vast action space in the Game of Go,
it is impractical to simulate every possible action.
The Upper Confidence Bound 1 applied to Trees
(UCT) identifies actions with higher potential to
win, allocating more simulations to these actions
rather than distributing simulations equally among
all actions. Once an action is decided based on this
process and physically executed, leading to a new
game state, the same procedure is then applied to
select actions from this new state, and the planning
continues until the actual end of the Game of Go.
MCTS typically involves four key procedures:
Selection: Traverse the current reasoning tree to se-
lect the node with the highest UCT for simulation.
Expansion: Extend the reasoning tree by adding
new child nodes from the selected node. Simula-
tion: Continue expanding from a child node until
the task is completed. Backpropagation: After
each simulation, update the average reward of cor-
responding node with the newly obtained simula-
tion reward.
3.2 Framework of MASTER
In our framework, MASTER, the concepts of rea-
soning tree, selection, expansion, and backpropa-
gation are analogous to those used in MCTS. How-
ever, we eliminate the simulation step due to those
two issues highlighted in the Introduction section.
Instead, our framework incorporates three special
mechanisms to derive rewards: providing more con-
text before self-evaluation, incorporating LLM’s
confidence in our novel UCT formula, and updat-
ing rewards in backpropagation. The details of
our framework are demonstrated in Figure 1 and
further explained in following paragraphs.
When our framework is presented with a task,
it initializes a root agent with the problem. This
agent then prompts the LLM to generate text that re-
flects on the current reasoning trace (Thought) and
proposes an action to solve the problem (Action).
The model uses a temperature of 0.6 to encourage
more diverse thoughts and actions in the reason-
ing tree. The agent then executes this action using
tools that interact with the external environment,
producing feedback (Observation). The texts, in-
cluding Thought, Action, and Observation, form
the agent’sSolution, as illustrated in Figure 1. Sub-
sequently, the agent prompts the LLM to generate
a textual output that verifies key facts in the current
Solution (Validation). Finally, based on the Solu-
tion and Validation, the agent prompts the LLM to
evaluate progress toward solving the problem, gen-
erating both a score and the LLM’s confidence in
this score (Assessment). These two values (score
and confidence) are then extracted. The model uses
a temperature of 0.0 for Validation and Assessment
to ensure more stable decisions. All texts (Solution,
Validation, and Assessment) form the agent’sCon-
text and are stored in its memory (Figure 1). The
score serves as the agent’s initial reward.
The previous paragraph describes the generation
of a single agent in our system. After the root agent
is generated, child agents are created following the
same procedure, with the root agent’s Context ap-
pended to the prompts of these child agents, as
they need to continue solving the problem. As
illustrated in Figure 1, two child agents ( Agent1
and Agent2) are generated using exactly the same
9412

=== Page 5 ===

procedure and prompt to explore diverse reasoning
paths from the same state (parent agent). The num-
ber of child agents is a hyperparameter, Number of
Branches, which varies depending on the task. The
creation of these child agents is termed Expansion
from the parent agent.
Further expansion can be carried out from any
existing agent using the same procedure. The UCT
of each agent is calculated, and the agent with the
highest UCT is selected for further expansion. An-
other hyperparameter, Maximum of Expansion, rep-
resents the approximate number of steps required
to solve the problem, allowing users to set it based
on their understanding of the task. If this limit is
reached without finding a satisfactory solution, the
solution from the terminal agent with the highest
reward is submitted as the final answer.
During the expansion of the reasoning tree,
agents that generate a final answer rather than an
intermediate step in their Solution, are called Ter-
minal Agents. For instance, in the HotpotQA task,
if an agent’s Action is ’Finish[]’, it is identified as
a terminal agent, as this Action indicates a final
answer. Similar indicators exist in the Solution
of other tasks. During the Evaluation (Figure 1)
which applies only to Terminal Agents, the LLM
assesses the correctness of the Solution. If the so-
lution is deemed correct, it is submitted as the final
answer, concluding the task. If not, Backprop-
agation is triggered, using the reward from this
terminal agent to update the rewards of all agents
on the path up to the root agent. Pseudo-code can
be found in Appendix A.
3.3 Formula of Modified UCT
Recent works RAP and LATS directly apply the
original UCT formula. To better suit our design,
we propose a modified UCT formula.
The original UCT formula is derived from Ho-
effding’s Inequality (Lattimore T, 2020) which can
be found in Appendix B. It is typically applied in
the following scenario: Given a node representing
a state (referred to as nodeh), there are multiple
subsequent actions to choose from (e.g.,ai,a j,a k).
To determine the Q value of these actions, multiple
simulations are conducted, and UCT is employed
to decide which action should be simulated. In-
stead of simply selecting the node with the highest
Q value (pure exploitation, the first term in Eqn
1), UCT balances exploitation and exploration by
incorporating an exploration term (the second term
in Eqn 1) that favors nodes with fewer simulations.
The nodei, representing the state resulting from ac-
tionai, is one of the child nodes of nodeh. The
UCT formula for nodei is:
UCT =Qi +
√
ln (Ni)
2ni
(1)
Qi =
∑ni
n=1rn
ni
(2)
Whereni is the number of backpropagations ap-
plied to the nodei. rn is the reward of the n-th
backpropagation. Qi is the estimation of Q value
calculated by Eqn 2. It represents the average re-
ward from simulations. Ni is the total number of
simulations by the parent node of the current nodei
which is nodeh. In other words, Ni is the sum of
ni,nj andnk in above example although nj and
nk are not explicitly shown in the UCT formula.
In our system,Qi, as the estimation of Q value,
consists of two components: Initial Reward is
extracted from Assessment when this agent is gen-
erated. Updating Reward is the mean of rewards
from backpropagation, similar toQi in Eqn 2. In-
spired by the research on auxiliary information
about rewards in the form of control variables
(Verma and Hanawal, 2021), we modify the reward
estimation in our system as shown in Eqn 3:
Qi =c0·r0 + (1−c0)·
∑ni
n=1rn
ni
(3)
Wherer0 is the initial reward given by LLM.c0
is the confidence of the LLM to this initial reward.
rn andni are the same with Eqn 2.
The original MCTS relies heavily on numerous
simulations to make this estimation accurate. Con-
sequently, it becomes unreliable when the number
ofni is small. On the other hand, our Q value has
an extra component (initial reward), as our Q value
is the weighted sum of initial reward and updating
reward with the confidence as weight. When LLM
has high confidence to the initial reward it assigns,
the influence of rewards from backpropagation (up-
dating reward) is reduced due to its lower weight
(1−c0). Conversely, when the LLM has low con-
fidence, updating reward is required to dominate
the Q value estimation while the weight of updat-
ing reward (1−c0) is higher. Notably, the number
of backpropagationni is automatically adapted to
each question rather than being manually set by
users. For complex tasks, the model requires more
attempts to obtain an acceptable answer, with each
9413

=== Page 6 ===

failed attempt triggering a backpropagation. For
simple question, the model may produce an ac-
ceptable result in their first attempt, eliminating
the need for backpropagation. This early termina-
tion mechanism completes the task while reducing
token consumption.
In the formula used by RAP and LATS, an ex-
ploration constantλreplaces the fixed 1/
√
2 as the
weight of the exploration term as following:
UCT =Qi +λ·
√
ln (Ni)
ni
(4)
In our approach, we use 1/
(
10
√
2c0
)
as the ex-
ploration weight. The significance of this adjust-
ment is twofold: 1). The exploration term reflects
the uncertainty associated with this agent. When
the LLM has low confidence in the initial reward,
the agent’s uncertainty is relatively high, necessi-
tating more exploration. In such cases, a higher ex-
ploration weight increases the UCT, guiding the al-
gorithm to select this agent for further exploration;
2).The number of backpropagations in our system
is significantly lower than in the original MCTS
while the slope of the logarithmic function is rela-
tively steep when the variable is small, so the value
of the exploration term tends to play a dominant
role. Therefore, this exploration weight should be
used to control the influence of this term. More-
over, when the minimum confidence of 0.1 is used,
the exploration weight equals 1/
√
2, the same as
the weight in Eqn 1.
In summary, the revised formula in our system
is:
UCT =



r0 ifni = 0
c0·r0 +(1−c0)·
ni∑
n=1
rn
ni
+ 1
10
√
2c0
·
√ lnNi
ni
otherwise
(5)
Whenni is 0, indicating that no backpropagation
has been applied to the node, the UCT of this node
is set to be its initial rewardr0.
3.4 Strategies of Reward Assignment
To conclude, the three special mechanisms we im-
plement to ensure the reliability of rewards in our
framework are:
1. Before assigning a reward in the Assessment
phase, an additional Validation step is con-
ducted, where the LLM comments on the cor-
rectness of the facts in the current solution.
These comments are added to the prompt for
the Assessment step, guiding the LLM toward
a more reliable reward. This design is mo-
tivated by the observation that the LLM per-
forms better when it is asked to address one
problem at a time. Separately verifying cor-
rectness and progress can lead to stable and
reliable scoring.
2. In the Assessment phase, the LLM is asked to
provide both a score and its confidence in that
score, rather than just the score alone. The
confidence value plays two roles in our mod-
ified UCT formula, which is detailed in the
Formula of Modified UCT subsection. If the
LLM has low confidence in the score it pro-
vides, the influence of this score is reduced
and the likelihood to select this agent for fur-
ther exploration is increased.
3. Backpropagation occurs after each simula-
tion in the original MCTS. Although we have
removed simulations, backpropagation is re-
tained in our framework. It is triggered when-
ever a terminal agent produces a Solution that
fails Evaluation. A failed Evaluation indicates
that the reasoning steps leading to this termi-
nal agent may be flawed, and their Q value
should be reduced accordingly. This mecha-
nism allows for the adjustment of rewards if
they are inaccurate at the outset.
4 Experiment Setup
To demonstrate the generalizability of our frame-
work, we conduct experiments across a diverse set
of tasks, including question answering (HotpotQA),
decision making (WebShop), and coding (MBPP).
These datasets are widely recognized benchmarks
in their respective domains.
In addition to assessing effectiveness and effi-
ciency, we also performed ablation and parame-
ter studies to investigate the contributions of each
mechanism in our framework and the impact of
hyperparameters.
4.1 Datasets
HotpotQA: (Yang et al., 2018) tests multi-hop
reasoning in LLM, requiring models to parse and
reason across multiple paragraphs. We used the
Distractor setting, where the task is to answer the
9414

=== Page 7 ===

question with a mix of relevant and irrelevant para-
graphs context. WebShop: (Yao et al., 2022) simu-
lates an e-commerce environment to test decision-
making abilities. The task involves navigating a
virtual store to find products that best match a
given instruction, with success measured by how
closely the selected product matches the require-
ment. MBPP: (Austin et al., 2021)) assesses cod-
ing abilities. Each task includes a problem descrip-
tion and test cases for validation. In our system,
agents generate and test complete code, with child
agents iteratively improving on errors identified by
their parent agents. A task is considered solved
when the generated code passes all test cases.
4.2 Baselines
Since we use GPT-4, a highly capable LLM, as
the base model, we take GPT-4 itself without any
agent, as a baseline. It is prompted with the task de-
scription and the same examples as our framework
to solve tasks in a single call (Few-shot Chain-of-
Thought). Notably, in this setting, GPT-4 cannot
solve HotpotQA and WebShop problems because
these tasks require multiple interactions with the
environment. For HotpotQA, the model must gen-
erate search keywords, receive the retrieved context
from the environment, and decide whether to search
for additional context or answer the question. For
WebShop, the model must purchase a target item on
a mock website through multiple search and click
actions. Expecting GPT-4 to perform these actions
without environment feedback in a single call is
impractical. When incorporating external environ-
ment feedback to enable multi-turn interactions,
the setup becomes identical to the experimental
conditions of ReAct. In other words, ReAct’s per-
formance in Table 1 serves as an indicator of the
base model’s capacity in these two tasks.
ReAct and Reflexion are well-known methods
in the planning domain, and our work integrates
some of their ideas. LATS, like our approach, is
a tree-based method and demonstrates strong per-
formance. Therefore, we compare against these
baselines across all three datasets. MetaGPT and
AgentVerse, two representative multi-agent sys-
tems, serve as our benchmarks in the multi-agent
setting. We evaluate them only on MBPP because
MetaGPT is specifically designed for programming
tasks, while AgentVerse requires execution tools,
and only the tool for programming tasks is avail-
able.
Additionally, we benchmark our framework
against the current state-of-the-art (SOTA) for each
dataset: Beam Retrieval for HotpotQA, AgentKit
for WebShop, and AgentCoder for MBPP. How-
ever, AgentKit is evaluated on two datasets in its
original paper (Crafter and WebShop), while its
GitHub repository provides code only for Crafter.
Moreover, the available code for Crafter cannot be
adapted to WebShop due to insufficient implemen-
tation details. Consequently, we rely on the original
performance claims from their paper. Nevertheless,
given the substantial performance gap between our
results and theirs, we believe our SOTA claims
remain highly plausible.
4.3 Implementation Details
Given the high cost of GPT-4, we randomly select
a sample of 100 questions from each dataset, fol-
lowing the approach used in Reflexion (Shinn et al.,
2023) and LATS (Zhou et al., 2024). To ensure
fairness, the same random seed is used across all
three datasets to select these 100 questions.
To mitigate the effect of LLM randomness on
accuracy, we repeat each experiment three times on
the same samples and report the mean accuracy in
Table 1. Our framework effectively controls LLM
randomness through the strategies outlined in the
Methodology section, where multiple steps support
and verify each other.
5 Results and Analysis
5.1 Effectiveness Analysis
We reproduce all baseline approaches, except for
AgentKit due to insufficient information, with GPT-
4 as base model on the same 100 questions and
record the results. Additionally, we compare these
results with those reported in the respective pa-
pers. The better result is used as the final value for
each baseline in Table 1. This method favors base-
line approaches and ensures that our framework
demonstrates superior performance across various
standards.
MASTER sets new SOTA performance across
multiple tasks: 1). 76.0% Exact Match accuracy
on HotpotQA, surpassing Beam Retrieval’s 73.3%
(Zhang et al., 2024b); 2). 80.0% accuracy on
WebShop, exceeding AgentKit’s 70.2% (Wu et al.,
2024). On MBPP, it closely matches AgentCoder’s
91.8% pass@1 accuracy with 91.0% (Huang et al.,
2024), showing competitive performance in pro-
gramming task.
9415

=== Page 8 ===

HotpotQA WebShop MBPP
GPT-4 (CoT) - - 0.683
ReAct 0.420 0.320 0.710
Reflexion 0.510 0.350 0.771
LATS 0.710 0.380 0.811
MetaGPT - - 0.877
AgentVerse - - 0.890
Beam Retrieval 0.733 - -
AgentKit - 0.702 -
AgentCoder - - 0.918
Ours 0.760 0.800 0.910
Table 1: Effectiveness comparison with accuracy.
5.2 Efficiency Analysis
As a tree-based method, token consumption is a
concern due to the diverse reasoning trajectories.
However, by removing the simulation step and
introducing an early termination mechanism, our
framework achieves higher efficiency compared to
other tree-based methods using MCTS. We bench-
mark our efficiency against LATS because: 1).
LATS is a typical tree-based approach with supe-
rior performance compared to similar frameworks;
2). LATS reports the lowest token consumption
when compared with ToT (Yao et al., 2023a) and
RAP (Hao et al., 2023) in their paper.
We measure token consumption for LATS (n =
5, k = 50) and MASTER ( number of branches =
2, maximum of expansion = 3) on the same 100
HotpotQA questions, using the same hyperparam-
eter settings as those in the effectiveness analysis
experiments. The average cost per question was
185,392 tokens for LATS and 10,937 tokens for
MASTER. Our approach uses only about 6% of
the tokens compared to LATS while delivering bet-
ter performance (Table 1).
LATS (Zhou et al., 2024) reports an average cost
of 173,290 tokens per question, lower than our re-
produced results. This discrepancy may be due to
the fact that their tests were conducted on correctly
answered questions, while our tests included some
incorrectly answered questions, which tend to con-
sume more tokens as the algorithm continues until
reaching the maximum trial limit.
5.3 Ablation Study
5.3.1 UCT Modification
In MCTS, the UCT formula balances exploration
and exploitation. One of our main contributions is
adapting this formula to better accommodate LLM.
We evaluate the impact of removing components
of our modified UCT formula, considering the fol-
lowing cases (Table 2):
1. Our full modified formula, incorporating the
weighted sum of initial and updating rewards,
and exploration weight influenced by the
LLM’s confidence (Eqn 5).
2. A variant with the weighted sum of rewards
and a fixed exploration weight (Eqn 6). This
differs from the full formula by not incorporat-
ing the LLM’s confidence in the exploration
term.
UCT =c0·r0 + (1−c0)·
∑ni
n=1rn
ni
+
√
ln (Ni)
ni
(6)
3. A variant using only the weighted sum of
rewards (Eqn 7), removing the entire explo-
ration term.
UCT =c0·r0 + (1−c0)·
∑ni
n=1rn
ni
(7)
4. A variant using only the initial reward for ex-
ploitation (Eqn 8), excluding exploration term
and updating reward from backpropagation.
UCT =r0 (8)
When using UCT with a fixed exploration weight
(case 2), performance declines on two out of three
datasets, even worse than the variant without the en-
tire exploration term. As discussed in the Methodol-
ogy section, the exploration term plays a dominant
role and should be modulated by the exploration
weight. This result supports that hypothesis, as
the system sometimes over-explores without pro-
gressing toward task completion when using this
formula. Omitting a dynamic exploration weight
based on confidence is harmful to the system.
Using the weighted sum of initial and updating
rewards (case 3) performs better than using the
initial reward alone (case 4), likely because the up-
dating reward incorporates additional information
from deeper in the reasoning tree.
The MBPP results indicate that different UCT
variants have no significant effect on this dataset.
This outcome likely arises because the Observa-
tion, represented by the test case results, is objec-
tive. The Observation is appended to the prompt
9416

=== Page 9 ===

HotpotQA WebShop MBPP
Full modified UCT 0.760 0.800 0.910
Fixed Exploration Weight0.700 0.677 0.910
w/o Exploration Term0.737 0.750 0.910
Only Initial Reward 0.723 0.703 0.910
Table 2: Ablation study with removing different compo-
nents of our modified UCT formula.
HotpotQA WebShop MBPP
Full setting 0.760 0.800 0.910
w/o Validation 0.623 0.563 0.863
w/o Assessment 0.233 0.157 0.743
Table 3: Ablation study with removing validation or
assessment of our agent.
of the Assessment, allowing the LLM to assign re-
wards with high confidence. Whenc0 is 1, all UCT
variants reduce to case 4 or very close to it. There-
fore, all settings yield identical or nearly identical
outcomes.
5.3.2 Agent Design
The validation step before assessment is another
key feature of our framework. We conduct ad-
ditional ablation studies, removing the validation
and assessment steps individually. Since the ini-
tial reward is derived from the assessment and the
algorithm cannot function without it, we assign
random initial rewards when the assessment step is
removed (Table 3).
Performance drops significantly when the vali-
dation or assessment step is removed, even for the
MBPP dataset, as validation greatly impacts reward
allocation, the core component of the MCTS. Ad-
ditionally, with random rewards assigned when the
assessment step is removed, performance essen-
tially relies on the LLM alone, or worse.
5.4 Parameter Study
We conduct parameter studies to determine optimal
values for two key hyperparameters: Number of
Branches (Table 4) and Maximum of Expansion
(Table 5), across all three datasets.
The Number of Branches has little effect on per-
formance in WebShop and MBPP. However, on
HotpotQA, performance drops by nearly 3% when
reducing it from 2 to 1. This reduction may hinder
the system, as multiple reasoning trajectories help
prevent getting stuck in incorrect states. Although
WebShop faces similar challenges, the agent can
use the dataset in-built action ’prev’ to mitigate,
though not completely avoid, this problem. To
Number of BranchesHotpotQA WebShop MBPP
1 0.733 0.797 0.903
2 (All datasets used)0.760 0.800 0.910
3 0.763 0.797 0.910
Table 4: Parameter study on Number of Branches.
Maximum of ExpansionHotpotQA WebShop MBPP
1 0.000 0.000 0.747
3 (HotpotQA & MBPP)0.760 0.013 0.910
8 (WebShop) 0.770 0.800 0.910
Table 5: Parameter study on Maximum of Expansion.
balance performance and cost, we use 2 for all
datasets.
We select 1, 3, 8 for the Maximum of Expansion
here because in our other experiments, 3 is used in
HotpotQA and MBPP while 8 is used for WebShop.
Normally, questions in HotpotQA and WebShop
require multiple steps to solve so their performance
drops dramatically when the Maximum of Expan-
sion is lower than the steps needed to solve the
problem, as they are forced to stop before getting
an answer.
6 Conclusion
This paper introduces MASTER, a novel multi-
agent system framework that leverages a special-
ized MCTS to enhance the planning capabilities of
LLM. Our LLM-optimized MCTS broadens the ap-
plicability of MCTS to a wider range of tasks with
reduced costs. Besides, we employ this algorithm
to guide agent recruitment and communication pro-
tocols, thereby introducing an innovative form of
multi-agent system. Extensive experiments across
various datasets demonstrate MASTER’s effective-
ness and efficiency over existing frameworks.
7 Limitations
There are some limitations in our framework.
Firstly, it relies heavily on the LLM’s ability to pro-
vide accurate scores and confidence assessments of
the current reasoning state. While GPT-4 performs
this task effectively, smaller open-source models
may encounter challenges at this step. Additionally,
users must configure certain hyperparameters for
the system, including the Maximum of Expansion
and the Number of Branches. The optimal values
for these parameters may vary depending on the
specific task.
9417

=== Page 10 ===

References
Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten
Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Dohan, Ellen
Jiang, Carrie Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le, and
Charles Sutton. 2021. Program synthesis with large
language models. Preprint, arXiv:2108.07732.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie
Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-V oss,
Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child,
Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu,
Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen,
Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin
Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam Mc-
Candlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario
Amodei. 2020. Language models are few-shot learn-
ers. Preprint, arXiv:2005.14165.
Guangyao Chen, Siwei Dong, Yu Shu, Ge Zhang,
Jaward Sesay, Börje F. Karlsson, Jie Fu, and Yemin
Shi. 2024a. Autoagents: A framework for automatic
agent generation. Preprint, arXiv:2309.17288.
Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Jingwei Zuo, Cheng Yang,
Chenfei Yuan, Chi-Min Chan, Heyang Yu, Yaxi Lu,
Yi-Hsin Hung, Chen Qian, Yujia Qin, Xin Cong,
Ruobing Xie, Zhiyuan Liu, Maosong Sun, and Jie
Zhou. 2024b. Agentverse: Facilitating multi-agent
collaboration and exploring emergent behaviors. In
The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
Representations.
Xinyun Chen, Maxwell Lin, Nathanael Schärli, and
Denny Zhou. 2024c. Teaching large language mod-
els to self-debug. In The Twelfth International Con-
ference on Learning Representations.
Zheng Chu, Jingchang Chen, Qianglong Chen, Weijiang
Yu, Tao He, Haotian Wang, Weihua Peng, Ming Liu,
Bing Qin, and Ting Liu. 2023. A survey of chain of
thought reasoning: Advances, frontiers and future.
Preprint, arXiv:2309.15402.
Rémi Coulom. 2006. Efficient selectivity and backup
operators in monte-carlo tree search. In 5th Interna-
tional Conference on Computer and Games.
Shibo Hao, Yi Gu, Haodi Ma, Joshua Jiahua Hong,
Zhen Wang, Daisy Zhe Wang, and Zhiting Hu. 2023.
Reasoning with language model is planning with
world model. In The 2023 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing.
Sirui Hong, Mingchen Zhuge, Jonathan Chen, Xiawu
Zheng, Yuheng Cheng, Ceyao Zhang, Jinlin Wang,
Zili Wang, Steven Ka Shing Yau, Zijuan Lin, Liyang
Zhou, Chenyu Ran, Lingfeng Xiao, Chenglin Wu,
and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 2023. Metagpt: Meta pro-
gramming for a multi-agent collaborative framework.
Preprint, arXiv:2308.00352.
Dong Huang, Jie M. Zhang, Michael Luck, Qingwen
Bu, Yuhao Qing, and Heming Cui. 2024. Agentcoder:
Multi-agent-based code generation with iterative test-
ing and optimisation. Preprint, arXiv:2312.13010.
Lei Huang, Weijiang Yu, Weitao Ma, Weihong Zhong,
Zhangyin Feng, Haotian Wang, Qianglong Chen,
Weihua Peng, Xiaocheng Feng, Bing Qin, and Ting
Liu. 2023. A survey on hallucination in large lan-
guage models: Principles, taxonomy, challenges, and
open questions. Preprint, arXiv:2311.05232.
Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yu-
taka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. 2023. Large
language models are zero-shot reasoners. Preprint,
arXiv:2205.11916.
Szepesvári C Lattimore T. 2020. Bandit Algorithms,
page 80. Cambridge University Press.
Guohao Li, Hasan Abed Al Kader Hammoud, Hani
Itani, Dmitrii Khizbullin, and Bernard Ghanem. 2023.
CAMEL: Communicative agents for ”mind” explo-
ration of large language model society. In Thirty-
seventh Conference on Neural Information Process-
ing Systems.
Jianghao Lin, Rong Shan, Chenxu Zhu, Kounianhua
Du, Bo Chen, Shigang Quan, Ruiming Tang, Yong
Yu, and Weinan Zhang. 2024. ReLLa: Retrieval-
enhanced large language models for lifelong sequen-
tial behavior comprehension in recommendation. In
The Web Conference 2024.
Xuefei Ning, Zinan Lin, Zixuan Zhou, Zifu Wang,
Huazhong Yang, and Yu Wang. 2024. Skeleton-of-
thought: Prompting llms for efficient parallel genera-
tion. Preprint, arXiv:2307.15337.
Shravan Pargaonkar. 2023. A comprehensive research
analysis of software development life cycle (sdlc) ag-
ile & waterfall model advantages, disadvantages, and
application suitability in software quality engineer-
ing. International Journal of Scientific and Research
Publications, 13:120–124.
Chen Qian, Xin Cong, Wei Liu, Cheng Yang, Weize
Chen, Yusheng Su, Yufan Dang, Jiahao Li, Juyuan
Xu, Dahai Li, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. 2023.
Communicative agents for software development.
Preprint, arXiv:2307.07924.
Linlu Qiu, Liwei Jiang, Ximing Lu, Melanie Sclar,
Valentina Pyatkin, Chandra Bhagavatula, Bailin
Wang, Yoon Kim, Yejin Choi, Nouha Dziri, and Xi-
ang Ren. 2024. Phenomenal yet puzzling: Testing
inductive reasoning capabilities of language models
with hypothesis refinement. In The Twelfth Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath,
Karthik R Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. 2023. Re-
flexion: language agents with verbal reinforcement
learning. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems.
9418

=== Page 11 ===

David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J. Maddison, Arthur
Guez, Laurent Sifre, George van den Driessche, Ju-
lian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Pan-
neershelvam, Marc Lanctot, Sander Dieleman, Do-
minik Grewe, John Nham, Nal Kalchbrenner, Ilya
Sutskever, Timothy Lillicrap, Madeleine Leach, Ko-
ray Kavukcuoglu, Thore Graepel, and Demis Hass-
abis. 2016. Mastering the game of Go with deep neu-
ral networks and tree search. Nature, 529(7587):484–
489.
Mirac Suzgun and Adam Tauman Kalai. 2024. Meta-
prompting: Enhancing language models with task-
agnostic scaffolding. Preprint, arXiv:2401.12954.
Karthik Valmeekam, Matthew Marquez, Alberto Olmo,
Sarath Sreedharan, and Subbarao Kambhampati.
2023. Planbench: An extensible benchmark for eval-
uating large language models on planning and rea-
soning about change. In Thirty-seventh Conference
on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets
and Benchmarks Track.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Ł ukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc.
Arun Verma and Manjesh Kumar Hanawal. 2021.
Stochastic multi-armed bandits with control variates.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems.
Xinyuan Wang, Chenxi Li, Zhen Wang, Fan Bai, Hao-
tian Luo, Jiayou Zhang, Nebojsa Jojic, Eric Xing, and
Zhiting Hu. 2024. Promptagent: Strategic planning
with language models enables expert-level prompt op-
timization. In The Twelfth International Conference
on Learning Representations.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten
Bosma, brian ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi, Quoc V Le,
and Denny Zhou. 2022. Chain of thought prompt-
ing elicits reasoning in large language models. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Jimmy Wei, Kurt Shuster, Arthur Szlam, Jason We-
ston, Jack Urbanek, and Mojtaba Komeili. 2023.
Multi-party chat: Conversational agents in group
settings with humans and models. Preprint,
arXiv:2304.13835.
Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran
Wu, Beibin Li, Erkang Zhu, Li Jiang, Xiaoyun
Zhang, Shaokun Zhang, Jiale Liu, Ahmed Hassan
Awadallah, Ryen W White, Doug Burger, and Chi
Wang. 2023. Autogen: Enabling next-gen llm ap-
plications via multi-agent conversation. Preprint,
arXiv:2308.08155.
Yue Wu, Yewen Fan, So Yeon Min, Shrimai Prab-
humoye, Stephen McAleer, Yonatan Bisk, Ruslan
Salakhutdinov, Yuanzhi Li, and Tom Mitchell. 2024.
Agentkit: Flow engineering with graphs, not coding.
Preprint, arXiv:2404.11483.
Zhiheng Xi, Wenxiang Chen, Xin Guo, Wei He, Yiwen
Ding, Boyang Hong, Ming Zhang, Junzhe Wang,
Senjie Jin, Enyu Zhou, Rui Zheng, Xiaoran Fan,
Xiao Wang, Limao Xiong, Yuhao Zhou, Weiran
Wang, Changhao Jiang, Yicheng Zou, Xiangyang
Liu, Zhangyue Yin, Shihan Dou, Rongxiang Weng,
Wensen Cheng, Qi Zhang, Wenjuan Qin, Yongyan
Zheng, Xipeng Qiu, Xuanjing Huang, and Tao Gui.
2023. The rise and potential of large language model
based agents: A survey. Preprint, arXiv:2309.07864.
Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio,
William Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Christo-
pher D. Manning. 2018. HotpotQA: A dataset for
diverse, explainable multi-hop question answering.
In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
2369–2380, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Shunyu Yao, Howard Chen, John Yang, and Karthik
Narasimhan. 2022. Webshop: Towards scalable real-
world web interaction with grounded language agents.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems, volume 35, pages 20744–20757. Curran Asso-
ciates, Inc.
Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran,
Thomas L. Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik R
Narasimhan. 2023a. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate
problem solving with large language models. In
Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak
Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
2023b. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting
in language models. In The Eleventh International
Conference on Learning Representations.
Bin Zhang, Hangyu Mao, Jingqing Ruan, Ying Wen,
Yang Li, Shao Zhang, Zhiwei Xu, Dapeng Li, Ziyue
Li, Rui Zhao, Lijuan Li, and Guoliang Fan. 2024a.
Controlling large language model-based agents for
large-scale decision-making: An actor-critic ap-
proach. Preprint, arXiv:2311.13884.
Jiahao Zhang, Haiyang Zhang, Dongmei Zhang, Yong
Liu, and Shen Huang. 2024b. End-to-end beam re-
trieval for multi-hop question answering. Preprint,
arXiv:2308.08973.
Yifan Zhang, Yang Yuan, and Andrew Chi-Chih Yao.
2024c. Meta prompting for ai systems. Preprint,
arXiv:2311.11482.
Andy Zhou, Kai Yan, Michal Shlapentokh-Rothman,
Haohan Wang, and Yu-Xiong Wang. 2024. Lan-
guage agent tree search unifies reasoning acting and
planning in language models.
A Pseudo Code
The pseudo code of our framework is demonstrated
in this section.
9419

=== Page 12 ===

After initializing a root agent with the question,
multiple LLM calls are made in ’root.action()’ to
get the solution, validation and assessment of this
root agent. The score and confidence are extracted
from assessment. If this is a terminal agent, LLM is
called again to decide whether its solution can pass
the evaluation. All the information above including
solution, validation, assessement, score, confidence
and pass (bool) is saved in the memory of this agent
and is passed to its child agent for informaion. In
this pseudo code, only pass, solution and score are
explicitly expressed for simplicity but all of them
are obtained in our full code.
Then the node with the highest UCT is selected
by the function ’select_with_uct(root)’. This func-
tion will go through all the agents under root agent,
which is the entire reasoning tree to select the one
with the highest UCT for expansion. This pro-
cedure is called Selection which will be done i
(Maximum of Expansion) times.
When an agent is selected, the algorithm will
generate a few child agent. Every generation is
done by ’agent.expand()’ which will initialize a
new agent and generate its own solution, validation,
assessment, etc. like above. The only difference
is that the root agent only has the question in its
prompt but these child agent has all the context of
the agents on the path from the root to itself in its
prompt (its parent, parent of parent, etc.). This cre-
atation of child agent will be repeatedj (Number
of Branches) times which is called Expansion.
Whenever a terminal agent is generated, the eval-
uation as mentioned above is conducted. If it fails
the evaluation (the variable pass is False), a proce-
dure of Backpropagation is triggered. The reward
of the agents on the path to this terminal agent will
be updated with the reward of it.
B Deduction of UCT Formula
In the methodology section, we proposed a modifi-
cation to the UCT formula. Here, we provide the
derivation of the original UCT formula.
According to Hoeffding’s Inequality, for a ran-
dom variabler such thatr∈[a,b ], ifr1,r 2,...rn
are independent andri∈[a,b ] almost surely with
ai<b i for alli, then:
P
(
1
ni
ni∑
n=1
(rn−E[rn])≥ε
)
≤exp
( −2ni2ε2
∑ni
n=1(bn−an)2
)
(9)
Algorithm 1 MASTER algorithm
Input: Question
Parameter: Expansion Maximum, Branches Num-
ber
Output: Solution
1: Initialize root with Question and Generate its
Context
2: root ← Agent(question)
3: pass,solution,sc ←root.action()
4: fori ← 1, ..., Expansion Maximum do
5: SELECTION
6: agent ← select_with_uct(root)
7: forj ← 1, ..., Branches Number do
8: EXPANSION
9: pass,child _solution,child _score ←
agent.expand()
10: ifpass is True then
11: return solution
12: else ifpass is False andchild is Terminal
then
13: BACKPROPAGATION
14: whileagent is not None do
15: agent.value ←
update(child_score)
16: agent.visits ←agent.visits + 1
17: agent ←agent.parent
18: end while
19: end if
20: end for
21: end for
The following term could be rewritten as:
1
ni
ni∑
n=1
(rn−E[rn]) = 1
ni
ni∑
n=1
rn−1
ni
ni∑
n=1
E[rn]
= 1
ni
ni∑
n=1
rn−E[rn]
(10)
In Eqn 10, the second term is the mean of the ran-
dom variablern which is noted asqi. The first term
is the sample mean or the estimation of qi which
is noted asQi. If rn as reward is always between
0 and 1, ∑ni
i=1(bn−an)2 = ∑ni
n=1 1 = ni. Then
Eqn 9 is:
P (Qi−qi≥ε)≤exp
(
−2ni2ε2)
(11)
Consider the symmetry:
P (Qi−qi≤−ε)≤exp
(
−2ni2ε2)
(12)
9420

=== Page 13 ===

Combine Eqn 11 and Eqn 12:
P (−ε≤Qi−qi≤ε)≥1−2·exp(−2ni2ε2)
(13)
LetNi = exp (2niε2), then
ε=
√
ln (Ni)
2ni
(14)
When we consider the upper bound of the reward:
Qi−qi≥−ε (15)
qi≤Qi +
√
ln (Ni)
2ni
(16)
Eqn 16 is the normal UCT formula mentioned in
our paper.
C Case Study
C.1 HotpotQA
Question: Dawn French’s Girls Who Do Comedy
included which American comedienne and televi-
sion host?
Agent0
Thought: The question asks for the name of an
American comedienne and television host who was
included in Dawn French’s Girls Who Do Comedy.
To answer this question, I need to find out which
American female comedians were featured on that
series.
Action: Search[Dawn French’s Girls Who Do
Comedy]
Observation: Dawn French’s Girls Who Do
Comedy is an interview series shown on BBC
Four... Whoopi Goldberg, Catherine Tate, Kathy
Burke, Julie Walters, Victoria Wood and Joan
Rivers...
Validation: The latest ’Thought’ is looking for
information about Dawn French’s Girls Who Do
Comedy which aligns with the ’Question’ that men-
tioned the interview series. The latest ’Action’
searched for Dawn French’s Girls Who Do Com-
edy as instructed by the latest ’Thought’, so they
are aligned.
Assessment: The trajectory has successfully
found out comediennes included in Dawn French’s
Girls Who Do Comedy. However, the trajectory
has not identify the American comedienn and tele-
vision host. Thus the correctness score is 3. The
confidence in this score is 9.
Agent1
Thought: Whoopi Goldberg, Catherine Tate,
Kathy Burke, Julie Walters, Victoria Wood and
Joan Rivers were included in Dawn French’s Girls
Who Do Comedy. To answer the question, I need
to search everyone of them for more information.
Action: Search[Whoopi Goldberg]
Observation: Caryn Elaine Johnson (born
November 13, 1955), known professionally as
Whoopi Goldberg, is an American actor, comedian,
author, and television personality...
Validation: The latest ’Thought’ is looking for
information about Whoopi Goldberg, Catherine
Tate, Kathy Burke, Julie Walters, Victoria Wood
and Joan Rivers which aligns with the ’Observa-
tion’ that they are included in Dawn French’s Girls
Who Do Comedy. The latest ’Action’ searched
for Whoopi Goldberg as instructed by the latest
’Thought’, so they are aligned.
Assessment: This trajectory has enough informa-
tion to answer the question since Whoopi Goldberg
is an American comedienne who is included in
Dawn French’s Girls Who Do Comedy. Thus the
correctness score is 8. The confidence in this score
is 7.
Agent2
Thought: The question asks for the name of
an American comedienne in Dawn French’s Girls
Who Do Comedy. To answer the question, I need
to search American comedienne.
Action: Search[American comedienne]
Observation: Katherine Beth Nolan (born Jan-
uary 28, 1987) is an American sports personality,
comedienne, and television host on Fox Sports 1...
Joan Alexandra Molinsky (June 8, 1933 – Septem-
ber 4, 2014), widely known as Joan Rivers, was an
American comedian, actress, writer, producer, and
television host...
Validation: The latest ’Thought’ is looking for
American comedienne which aligns with the ’Ob-
servation’ that comediennes included in Dawn
French’s Girls Who Do Comedy are listed. The
latest ’Action’ searched for American comedienne
as instructed by the latest ’Thought’, so they are
aligned.
Assessment: This trajectory searched American
comedienne but did identify the one included in
Dawn French’s Girls Who Do Comedy. Thus the
correctness score is 6. The confidence in this score
is 9.
Agent3
Thought: Whoopi Goldberg is an American
comedienne who is included in Dawn French’s
9421

=== Page 14 ===

Agent0
Agent1 Agent2
Agent3 Agent4 Agent5
Agent0
Agent1 Agent2
Agent3 Agent4
Agent5 Agent6
Agent7
Agent0
Agent1
HotpotQA
WebShop MBPP
Agenti
Agenti
Agenti
Regular Agent
Terminal Agent failed Evaluation
Regular Agent passed Evaluation
Expansion
Backpropagation
Reasoning Tree of Three Case 
Studies in Appendix
Figure 2: Reasoning Tree of case studies on three datasets.
Girls Who Do Comedy and all the information
needed is found. I should answer the question now.
Action: Finish[Whoopi Goldberg]
Validation: The latest ’Thought’ indicated to
answer the question with Whoopi Goldberg which
does not align with the ’Observation’ because it is
not mentioned that Whoopi Goldberg is a television
host. The latest ’Action’ finished the question with
answer ’Whoopi Goldberg’ as instructed by the
latest ’Thought’, so they are aligned.
Assessment: The answer is incorrect according
to the validation because it is not mentioned that
Whoopi Goldberg is a television host. Thus the
correctness score is 2. The confidence in this score
is 7.
Evaluation: False
Agent4
Thought: Whoopi Goldberg is an American
comedienne included in Dawn French’s Girls Who
Do Comedy and all the information needed is
found. I should answer the question now.
Action: Finish[Whoopi Goldberg]
Validation: The latest ’Thought’ answers the
question with Whoopi Goldberg which does not
align with the ’Observation’ because it is not men-
tioned that Whoopi Goldberg is a television host.
The latest ’Action’ finished the question with an-
swer ’Whoopi Goldberg’ as instructed by the latest
’Thought’, so they are aligned.
Assessment: The answer is incorrect according
to the validation because Whoopi Goldberg is not
a television host. Thus the correctness score is 2.
The confidence in this score is 7.
Evaluation: False
Agent5
Thought: Joan Rivers was an American come-
dian and television host who is included in Dawn
French’s Girls Who Do Comedy and all the in-
formation needed is found. I should answer the
question now.
Action: Finish[Joan Rivers]
Validation: The latest ’Thought’ indicated to an-
swer the question with Joan Rivers which aligns
with the ’Observation’ because Joan Rivers is an
American comedian and a television host who is
included in Dawn French’s Girls Who Do Com-
edy. The latest ’Action’ Finished the question with
answer ’Joan Rivers’ as instructed by the latest
’Thought’, so they are aligned.
Assessment: The answer is correct according to
the validation because all the informaion is aligned.
Thus the correctness score is 10. The confidence in
this score is 9.
Evaluation: True
C.2 WebShop
Question: Instruction: Find me dual band stream-
ing media players with quad core, and price lower
than 350.00 dollars
Agent0
9422

=== Page 15 ===

Thought: The instruction requires finding a dual-
band streaming media player with a quad-core pro-
cessor and a price lower than $350.00. Since there
is a search bar available, the best course of action
is to use it to search for products that match the
criteria.
Action: search[dual band streaming media
player with quad core]
Observation: Product index is B09LSKQF8C.
Product description is Superbox S3 Pro Dual
Band Wi-Fi 2.4Ghz 5Ghz Supports 6K Video.
Product price is $329.0... Available actions: has
search bar: False, clickables: [b09lskqf8c,
b09nmzs7hk, b00r249c5g, b07srs3mxp,
b00ofqr8d2, b0871vqt3q, b085vfmxmz,
b01lzwdnx6, b08qsnm69h, b08m5byqn9]
Validation: The common attributes include
dual-band, streaming media player, quad-core,
and price lower than $350.00, while there are
no optional attributes specified in the instruc-
tion. The group of products to be discarded
(Group 1) includes B09NMZS7HK, B00R249C5G,
B07SRS3MXP, B00OFQR8D2, B0871VQT3Q,
B085VFMXMZ, B01LZWDNX6, B08QSNM69H,
and B08M5BYQN9 because they either do not
match the common attributes of being a dual-band
streaming media player with a quad-core proces-
sor or exceed the specified price limit. The group
of products to be considered (Group 2) includes
B09LSKQF8C because it matches the common
attributes of being a dual-band streaming media
player with a quad-core processor and is priced
below $350.00.
Assessment: The product B09LSKQF8C meets
all the specified requirements: it is a dual-band
streaming media player with a quad-core processor
and is priced below $350.00. Thus, this product is a
suitable choice and the task is close to completion,
pending a final review of the product details and
the purchase action. Thus the correctness score is
6. The confidence in this score is 9.
Agent1
Thought: The product B09LSKQF8C seems to
fit the requirements as it is a dual-band streaming
media player and is priced below $350.00. How-
ever, the product description does not mention if it
has a quad-core processor. To ensure that it meets
all the criteria, I need to click on the product index
B09LSKQF8C to view more detailed information
before making a purchase decision.
Action: click[b09lskqf8c]
Observation: Product description is Superbox
S3 Pro Dual Band Wi-Fi 2.4Ghz 5Ghz Supports
6K Video. Price: $329.0. Click corresponding
options if needed. Click ’features’ if you need
more information. Click ’buy now’ if you decide
to purchase this product. Available actions: has
search bar: False, clickables: [back to search, prev,
description, features, reviews, buy now]
Validation: The common attributes include dual-
band streaming media players, quad-core, and price
lower than 350.00 dollars, while there are no op-
tional attributes specified in the instruction. The
product Superbox S3 Pro fits the common attributes
as it is a dual-band streaming media player and is
priced below $350.00. However, the product de-
scription does not mention if it has a quad-core
processor, which is a required common attribute.
Assessment: The latest ’Thought’ indicates that
the quad-core processor attribute is crucial and has
not yet been confirmed for the Superbox S3 Pro.
The ’Action’ taken is to click on ’features’ to ver-
ify this attribute, and the ’Observation’ is pending,
awaiting confirmation on whether the quad-core
processor is present. If the feature is confirmed,
the task is close to completion; otherwise, further
search is required. Thus the correctness score is 7.
The confidence in this score is 8.
Agent2
Agent2 is similar to Agent1, omitted due to
space limitation.
Agent3
Thought: The Superbox S3 Pro mentions that it
supports dual-band Wi-Fi and 6K video, and the
price is listed as $329.00, which meets the price
requirement. However, it is not confirmed whether
the device has a quad-core processor. The details
could be found in ’description’ section. It is nec-
essary to check the ’description’ to find out the
specified requirements before proceeding with the
purchase.
Action: click[description]
Observation: The newest SuperBox S3 Pro is
an advanced voice control IPTV box, with a brand
new Bluetooth remote and built-in artificial intelli-
gence system, you can easily speak to control your
TV box. The box has 2GB of RAM and 32GB of
storage, utilizes a quad-core ARM Cortex-A53 pro-
cessor, supports Android 9.0 OS. The new model
has a new flat rectangular shape of design with an
additional led display and new interface, the Super-
Box S3 Pro has also added more features. It adopts
2T2R WiFi technology makes our streaming de-
vice 60% faster and more stable. In conclusion,
9423

=== Page 16 ===

the SuperBox S3 Pro is really the game-changer in
streamer, it is by far the most powerful and most
user-friendly TV Box on the market. Available ac-
tions: has search bar: False, clickables: [back to
search, prev]
Validation: The common attributes include dual-
band streaming media players, quad-core, and price
lower than 350.00 dollars, while there are no op-
tional attributes specified in the instruction. It also
has a quad-core processor, which is a required com-
mon attribute.
Assessment: The latest ’Thought’ indicates that
the quad-core processor attribute is crucial and is
not confirmed for the Superbox S3 Pro. The ’Ac-
tion’ taken is to click on ’description’ to verify this
attribute, as quad-core processor is present, the task
is close to completion. Thus the correctness score
is 7. The confidence in this score is 7.
Agent4
Thought: The product description provided for
the Superbox S3 Pro mentions that it supports dual-
band Wi-Fi and 6K video, and the price is listed as
$329.00, which meets the price requirement. How-
ever, the description does not confirm whether the
device has a quad-core processor. The ’features’
section is likely to contain more detailed specifi-
cations about the product, including the processor
details. It is necessary to check the ’features’ to
ensure that the product meets all the specified re-
quirements before proceeding with the purchase.
Action: click[features]
Observation: Prev Built-in V oice Control System
Android 9.0 OS Quad-core ARM Cortex-A53 Pro-
cessor 2T2R( 2 Transmitter, 2 receivers) antenna
and 2.4G/5G Dual Band WiFi 2GB DDR3 Memory
32GB eMMC Internal Storage Support 4K@60fps.
Available actions: has search bar: False, clickables:
[back to search, prev]
Validation: The common attributes include dual-
band streaming media players, quad-core proces-
sor, and price lower than $350.00 dollars. There
are no optional attributes specified in the instruc-
tion. The current state indicates that the product
B09LSKQF8C, identified as the Superbox S3 Pro,
has been clicked on and its features have been
examined. The features confirm that the product
has a quad-core ARM Cortex-A53 processor and
supports 2.4G/5G dual-band Wi-Fi. The price of
$329.00 is also within the specified budget. Since
the product meets all the common attributes spec-
ified in the instruction, it is the correct product to
select. The trajectory does not require reselection
of any attributes, as there are no optional attributes
to consider, and the product matches all the com-
mon attributes. Therefore, the next step should be
to proceed with the purchase.
Assessment: The product B09LSKQF8C, Super-
box S3 Pro, has been confirmed to have a quad-core
ARM Cortex-A53 processor, supports dual-band
Wi-Fi, and is priced at $329.00, which meets all
the specified requirements. The task is close to
being solved as the only remaining step is to initi-
ate the purchase by clicking ’buy now’. Thus the
correctness score is 9. The confidence in this score
is 8.
Agent5
Thought: The features of the Superbox S3 Pro
confirm that it has a quad-core ARM Cortex-A53
processor, supports 2.4G/5G dual-band WiFi, and
is within the specified price range. Since it meets
all the requirements outlined in the instruction, the
next step is to go back to the previous page where
the ’buy now’ button is available and complete the
purchase.
Action: click[prev]
Observation: Product description is Superbox
S3 Pro Dual Band Wi-Fi 2.4Ghz 5Ghz Supports
6K Video. Price: $329.0. Click corresponding op-
tions if needed. Click ’features’ if you need more
information. Click ’buy now’ if you decide to pur-
chase this product.Available actions: has search
bar: False, clickables: [back to search, prev, de-
scription, features, reviews, buy now]
Validation: The common attributes include dual-
band streaming media players with a quad-core
processor and a price lower than $350.00. There
are no optional attributes specified in the instruc-
tion. The current state shows that the Superbox S3
Pro meets all the common attribute requirements:
it supports dual-band Wi-Fi, has a quad-core ARM
Cortex-A53 processor, and is priced at $329.00,
which is below the $350.00 threshold. Since there
are no optional attributes to consider and the prod-
uct matches all the common attributes, the next
logical step is to proceed with the purchase. The
topic of the response is to remind the agent to com-
plete the purchase. Since the product meets all
the necessary criteria and there are no optional at-
tributes to adjust, the agent should click ’buy now’
to finalize the purchase.
Assessment: The product Superbox S3 Pro has
been confirmed to meet all the specified require-
ments, including the dual-band capability, quad-
core ARM Cortex-A53 processor, and the price
9424

=== Page 17 ===

point of $329.00. The next step is to click ’buy
now’ to proceed with the purchase, as there are
no optional attributes to adjust and all common at-
tributes are satisfied. Thus the correctness score is
9. The confidence in this score is 9.
Agent6 is similar to Agent5, omitted due to
space limitation.
Agent7
Thought: The Superbox S3 Pro has been con-
firmed to meet all the requirements of the instruc-
tion, which include being a dual-band streaming
media player with a quad-core processor and hav-
ing a price lower than $350.00. The ’buy now’
button is available to complete the purchase.
Action: click[buy now]
Observation: Product description is Superbox
S3 Pro Dual Band Wi-Fi 2.4Ghz 5Ghz Supports
6K Video. Price: $329.0. Click corresponding op-
tions if needed. Click ’features’ if you need more
information. Click ’buy now’ if you decide to pur-
chase this product.Available actions: has search
bar: False, clickables: [back to search, prev, de-
scription, features, reviews, buy now]
Validation: The common attributes include dual-
band streaming media players with a quad-core
processor and a price lower than $350.00. There are
no optional attributes specified in the instruction.
The current state shows that the Superbox S3 Pro
meets all the common attribute requirements and
there are no optional attributes to consider.
Assessment: The product Superbox S3 Pro has
been confirmed to meet all the specified require-
ments, including the dual-band capability, quad-
core ARM Cortex-A53 processor, and the price
point of $329.00. Thus the correctness score is 10,
The confidence in this score is 10.
Evaluation: True
C.3 MBPP
Qustion: Write a function to count all the distinct
pairs having a difference of k in any array.
Test cases:
assert countpairs([1, 5, 3, 4, 2], 5, 3) == 2
assert countpairs([8, 12, 16, 4, 0, 20], 6, 4) == 5
assert countpairs([2, 4, 1, 3, 4], 5, 2) == 3
Agent0
Thought: To solve this problem, I need to find
all the unique pairs (a, b) in the array such that the
absolute difference between a and b is k. To do this
efficiently, I can use a set to keep track of the ele-
ments in the array for constant-time lookups. Then,
I can iterate through the array and for each element,
I can check if the element plus k or the element
minus k exists in the set. If it does, it constitutes a
distinct pair with the required difference. I should
also ensure that I count each pair only once.
Action:
def countpairs(arr, n, k):
unielements = set(arr)
count = 0
for number in unielements:
if (number + k) in unielements:
count += 1
if (number - k) in unielements:
count += 1
return count // 2
Observation:
Tests passed:
assert countpairs([1, 5, 3, 4, 2], 5, 3) == 2
assert countpairs([8, 12, 16, 4, 0, 20], 6, 4) == 5
Tests failed:
assert countpairs([2, 4, 1, 3, 4], 5, 2) == 3 while
output: 2
Passed 2 out of 3 tests. Failed 1 out of 3 tests.
Validation: The code did not pass the last test
case. The issue lies in the logic used to count
the pairs. The current implementation incorrectly
counts a pair twice if both ‘number + k‘ and ‘num-
ber - k‘ exist in the set of unique elements. How-
ever, this approach does not account for duplicate
elements in the array, which can lead to incorrect
pair counts.
Assessment: The code is almost correct but fails
one test case due to a logical error in counting pairs.
Thus the correctness score is 7. The confidence in
this score is 10.
Agent1
Thought: The previous code does not correctly
handle duplicates where the difference between
numbers should be counted multiple times if there
are multiple occurrences of a number. I should use
a dictionary to keep track of the occurrences of
each number as we iterate through the array.
Action:
def countpairs(arr, n, k):
count = 0
seen = {}
for num in arr:
if num + k in seen:
count += seen[num + k]
if num - k in seen:
count += seen[num - k]
if num in seen:
seen[num] += 1
9425

=== Page 18 ===

else:
seen[num] = 1
return count
Observation:
Tests passed:
assert countpairs([1, 5, 3, 4, 2], 5, 3) == 2
assert countpairs([8, 12, 16, 4, 0, 20], 6, 4) == 5
assert countpairs([2, 4, 1, 3, 4], 5, 2) == 3
Tests failed:
Passed 3 out of 3 tests. Failed 0 out of 3 tests.
Validation: Since the code has passed all the
tests and there are no observed errors or failures, I
suggest the evaluator to pass the code.
Assessment: The code is correct and passes all
the test cases. Thus the correctness score is 10. The
confidence in this score is 10.
Evaluation: True
9426