=== PAGE 1 ===
SEFRQO: A Self-Evolving Fine-Tuned RAG-Based Query
Optimizer
Hanwen Liu∗
University of Southern
California
Los Angeles, USA
hanwen_liu@usc.edu
Qihan Zhang∗
University of Southern
California
Los Angeles, USA
qihanzha@usc.edu
Ryan Marcus
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, USA
rcmarcus@seas.upenn.edu
Ibrahim Sabek
University of Southern
California
Los Angeles, USA
sabek@usc.edu
Abstract
Query optimization is a crucial problem in database systems that
has been studied for decades. Learned query optimizers (LQOs) can
improve performance over time by incorporating feedback; how-
ever, they suffer from cold-start issues and often require retraining
when workloads shift or schemas change. Recent LLM-based query
optimizers leverage pre-trained and fine-tuned LLMs to mitigate
these challenges. Nevertheless, they neglect LLMs’ in-context learn-
ing and execution records as feedback for continuous evolution.
In this paper, we present SEFRQO, a Self-Evolving Fine-tuned
RAG-based Query Optimizer. SEFRQO mitigates the cold-start
problem of LQOs by continuously learning from execution feed-
back via a Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) framework. We
employ both supervised fine-tuning and reinforcement fine-tuning
to prepare the LLM to produce syntactically correct and perfor-
mance efficient query hints. Moreover, SEFRQO leverages the LLM’s
in-context learning capabilities by dynamically constructing prompts
with references to similar queries and the historical execution
record of the same query. This self-evolving paradigm iteratively
optimizes the prompt to minimize query execution latency. Evalua-
tions show that SEFRQO outperforms state-of-the-art LQOs, achiev-
ing up to 65.05% and 93.57% reductions in query latency on the CEB
and Stack workloads, respectively, compared to PostgreSQL.
1 Introduction
Query optimization is a fundamental and performance-critical prob-
lem in database systems that focuses on translating declarative user
queries into efficient query plans. Human experts take decades to de-
sign and improve classical query optimizers (e.g., PostgreSQL [40]).
To try and accelerate optimizer development and improve query per-
formance, several studies have applied different techniques to query
optimization, such as machine learning [11, 30, 31, 61, 63, 65, 69]
and large language models [50, 62].
While these learned query optimizers (LQOs) represent exciting
work and have even seen some industry adoption [68], we argue
that existing LQOs capture at most two of three desirable properties:
(1) An LQO should learn from its mistakes, quickly and actively
incorporating feedback from query plans.
(2) An LQO should work immediately, without requiring exten-
sive training (i.e., the “cold start” problem).
(3) An LQO should adapt to changes in schema, workload, and
data, without significant human effort.
For example, the Bao [30] system learns from its mistakes and
adapts to changes, but requires several hours of training data before
∗Both authors contributed equally to this work.
becoming competitive. The Fastgres system [ 59] does not suffer
from the cold start problem and can learn from its mistakes, but it
cannot adapt to changes in query workload with significant retrain-
ing. Three recent systems applying LLMs (or their components)
to query optimization [ 2, 50, 62] employ fine-tuned LLMs as an
oracle for either plan generation or plan selection. However, due
to the high cost of fine-tuning an LLM, these approaches cannot
immediately learn from their mistakes or continuously improve
during runtime.
Why is there no existing system with all the desired properties?
Intuitively, LQOs that do not use LLMs tend to have below-par
reasoning skills: they must simplify the problem by either requiring
large amounts of training data (and therefore having a “cold start”)
or by assuming the schema and workload are fixed (and therefore
not being able to adapt). LQOs that do use LLMs can work imme-
diately and adapt to changes, but correcting their mistakes using
current techniques is too costly for the critical path of a DBMS.
In this paper, we propose SEFRQO, a RAG-based query optimizer
that has all three of our desired properties. SEFRQO uses an LLM to
avoid the cold start problem and adapt to changes. To learn from its
mistakes, SEFRQO uses a continuously-updated vector database of
past query executions that serve as the query optimizer’s “memory”.
SEFRQO generates a hint-based query plan to guide the query opti-
mizer in a classical database system (e.g., PostgreSQL [40]), where
such a hint is optimized and generated using an LLM. SEFRQO re-
lies on two complementary phases to optimize the hint generation
process: offline LLM fine-tuning and online LLM in-context learning .
Since these techniques have higher overhead than traditional query
optimizers, SERFQO targets long-running OLAP queries where
performance gains can outweigh increased optimization overhead.
To prepare a fine-tuned LLM capable of generating correctly for-
matted and efficient query plan hints, SEFRQO adopts a combined
supervised fine-tuning (SFT) [14] and reinforcement fine-tuning
(RFT) [57] technique. Using SFT, SEFRQO teaches the LLM the ex-
pected hint format. For RFT, SEFRQO introduces an efficient Query
Group Relative Policy Optimization (Q𝐺𝑅𝑃𝑂 ) approach, based on
GRPO [46], to steer the LLM’s output preferences toward hints that
reduce query execution latency. Q 𝐺𝑅𝑃𝑂 defines a latency-based
reward model that interacts with the database execution engine to
directly measure the corresponding latency of the generated query
hint. Besides, Q𝐺𝑅𝑃𝑂 performs an in-group comparison among mul-
tiple hints generated for the same query; it obviates the need for
additional labeled datasets as in other RFT algorithms, such as DPO
(e.g. [50]). By not relying on a limited labeled dataset, Q𝐺𝑅𝑃𝑂 ’s fine-
tuning encourages LLMs’ self-exploration, which further inspires
1
arXiv:2508.17556v1  [cs.DB]  24 Aug 2025

=== PAGE 2 ===
Liu et al.
their reasoning and generalization capabilities to handle previously
unseen workloads or shifting database schemas.
Another key innovation of SEFRQO lies in leveraging online
LLM RAG-based in-context learning, in which LLMs adapt to new
tasks by conditioning on a few relevant RAG-based examples that
are retrieved and provided directly within the input context (i.e.,
the prompt) without modifying model parameters. These examples
allow the model to better understand tasks and generate more
appropriate outputs [1, 3, 58, 60]. Importantly, in-context learning
is most effective when the retrieved examples closely align with
the target query. To facilitate this, SEFRQO builds and maintains a
special vector database of the most relevant query execution records.
Additionally, SEFRQO introduces a self-evolving feedback paradigm
that enables the LLM to learn from historical execution records
of the same query. The historical best plan generated by SEFRQO
and its corresponding performance gain over the baseline provide
additional contextual information. These components iteratively
optimize the prompt, motivating the LLM to generate an optimized
hint that minimizes the execution latency.
Our experimental results show that SEFRQO consistently out-
performs both PostgreSQL and two state-of-the-art LQOs, namely
Bao [30] and Balsa [61]. Our evaluations are based on four work-
loads: JOB [24], CEB [36], Stack [30], and TPC-DS [ 4]. On CEB,
SEFRQO achieves a 65.05% reduction in query execution time com-
pared to PostgreSQL, and outperforms LQOs. On Stack, it can reduce
up to 93.57% of the execution time for certain queries and 40.10%
for overall performance. On TPC-DS, SEFRQO reduces 13.28% exe-
cution time for all queries. By leveraging a dynamic prompt with a
self-evolving paradigm and successful fine-tuning, SEFRQO demon-
strates surprising cross-domain capability on the previously unseen
Stack workload, even surpassing LQOs directly trained on that
workload in some metric. SEFRQO also supports flexible workload
shifts that current LQOs find challenging.SEFRQO also supports the
cross-DBMS scenario. On MySQL, it achieves a 26.28% reduction in
execution time without requiring extra fine-tuning. Additionally,
we observe that SEFRQO can learn from the provided query plan
at the sub-plan level and generate an improved query plan through
further reasoning and analysis. Furthermore, we conduct overhead
analysis and ablation studies to evaluate several configurations.
Finally, we conduct deeper investigations across various scenarios
to test robustness and effects.
We summarize our contributions as follows:
(1) We are the first to formally define hint-based query opti-
mization with LLMs as a two-phase process: offline LLM
fine-tuning and online in-context learning.
(2) We propose an efficient supervised fine-tuning workflow
to teach LLMs the hint format using a labeled dataset.
(3) We introduce Query Group Relative Policy Optimization
that incorporates a latency-based reward model based on
actual query execution and group relative advantage feed-
back, enhancing LLM reasoning in unseen scenarios.
(4) We present RAG-based prompt optimization, which lever-
ages similar references and historical feedback to dynami-
cally construct prompts and drive continuous self-evolution
of SEFRQO. To our knowledge, this is the first application
of RAG systems to query optimization.
(5) Our experiments demonstrate that SEFRQO outperforms
both LQOs and PostgreSQL and generalizes effectively across
multiple workloads and DBMSes without retraining.
2 Preliminaries
LLMs are transformer-based models [16] with billions of parameters
that generalize well across a wide range of tasks (e.g., question-
answering [21] and code generation [20]). During the pre-training
stage, LLMs learn from a vast corpus of knowledge and capture gen-
eral understanding capabilities. To address the query optimization
task, we exploit the LLM to generate a hint-based query plan, and
to adapt the LLM to this specific task, we rely on fine-tuning and
RAG-based prompting procedures. First, we provide a brief back-
ground on the hint-based query optimization process (Section 2.1).
Then, we describe how the LLM’s generation (inference) process
works (Section 2.2). Finally, we provide an overview of the two
main LLM fine-tuning paradigms, namely supervised fine-tuning
(Section 2.3) and reinforcement fine-tuning (Section 2.4), as well as
the RAG retrieval workflow (Section 2.5) we use in our system.
2.1 Hint-based Query Plan Generation
Hint-based plan generation is a commonly employed method in
many learned query optimizers (LQOs) (e.g., [61, 69]). For example,
LQOs (e.g., [61]) that are integrated with PostgreSQL [41] employ
pg_hint_plan [38] to tweak the PostgreSQL [41] execution plans
by incorporating “hint” in SQL comments. The hints support both
a join-order mode (simple mode) and a full-plan mode (complete
mode). In join-order mode, the hint is represented by a clause
beginning with “Leading” to specify the join order of relations.
For example, the hint: Leading (a (b c)) indicates that 𝑏 ⊲ ⊳𝑐 is
performed first, followed by 𝑎 ⊲ ⊳(𝑏 ⊲ ⊳𝑐). Then, PostgreSQL will
decide the detailed operators plan (e.g., operator type for each join).
In full-plan mode, the hint conveys additional information, such
as the scan types for tables (e.g., “IndexScan”, “SeqScan”) and the
join types between tables (e.g., “HashJoin”, “NestedLoop”). This
hint format is interpreted by PostgreSQL to precisely control query
planning and execution. An example of a full-plan mode hint is
shown in the following section (see the third part in Figure 2). In our
paper, we employ both modes as different query plan generation
settings. Once a hint is accepted by the query optimizer, it is turned
into a query plan and subsequently used for actual execution.
2.2 LLM Generation
Prompts are commonly used to interact with LLMs. A prompt is a
piece of text that guides the model in generating more content. It
may include a System Prompt , which defines the model’s role or
context (e.g., “You are a database expert performing query optimiza-
tion task”), and aUser Prompt , which specifies particular questions
or tasks (e.g., “Generate a query plan for this query:” followed by de-
tailed query information). When processing this natural-language
prompt, the tokenizer separates the raw text into words and con-
verts them into a sequence of discrete tokens. Each token is then
mapped to an integer according to the model’s vocabulary, after
which the LLM can begin processing. The most fundamental input
can be represented as a sequence of tokens x = [𝑥1, . . . , 𝑥𝑛].
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
SEFRQO: A Self-Evolving Fine-Tuned RAG-Based Query Optimizer
LLMs often adopt an auto-regressive approach to generate re-
sponse sequences [16]. Their inference processes are typically based
on next-token prediction. Specifically, the original input tokens and
the previously generated output tokens from the previous steps
are fed into the model to generate a new token at the current step.
Assume an input sequence x is sent to an LLM parameterized by 𝜃.
The corresponding output token sequence can be expressed as
y = [𝑦1, . . . , 𝑦𝑇 ], containing 𝑇 tokens. This token sequence y is
then converted back to natural language by the tokenizer. In our
context, y represents a query hint (See Section 2.1). Mathematically,
the LLM’s generation process can be expressed by the probability
𝑝𝜃 (y | x), which factorizes into the product of conditional proba-
bilities for each token 𝑦𝑡 in the output sequence:
𝑝𝜃 (y | x) = 𝑝𝜃
 𝑦1, 𝑦2, . . . , 𝑦𝑇 | x =
𝑇Ö
𝑡 =1
𝑝𝜃
 𝑦𝑡
 x, 𝑦 1:𝑡 −1
 (1)
For clarity in the rest of the paper, we simplify the token-related
notions and hide the tokenizer workflow in the LLM generation
process by describing the whole process at the natural-language
level. We use the notation x instead of x to represent the prompt,
and use ℎ instead of y to directly denote the generated hint.
2.3 Supervised Fine-tuning for LLMs
Supervised fine-tuning (SFT) [14] adjusts the parameters of LLMs
by training them on high-quality, labeled data to enhance their
ability to perform specific tasks. To improve LLM performance
in our hint-based query plan generation task, a training set Dsft
comprising pairs of prompt x and corresponding pre-generated
hint output ℎ∗ needs to be constructed (We describe the details
in Section 4). Here, ℎ∗ denotes the reference hint, distinguishing
it from the LLM-generated hint ℎ. During supervised fine-tuning,
we maximize the conditional predictive probability 𝑝𝜃 (ℎ∗ | x) by
minimizing the expectation E of the negative log-likelihood:
Lsft(𝜃 ) = E(x,ℎ∗ )∼Dsft

− log 𝑝𝜃 (ℎ∗ | x)

(2)
Using SFT, the LLM is expected to become familiar with our task,
i.e., learn the format of the query hint output and internal logic for
generating an effective query plan.
2.4 Reinforcement Fine-tuning for LLMs
Reinforcement fine-tuning (RFT) provides an alternative method for
enhancing the specific capabilities of LLMs by employing reinforce-
ment learning to update their parameters. RFT has been proven
effective in further improving the reasoning abilities of LLMs after
the SFT stage (e.g., [57]). In our task, reasoning ability reflects an im-
proved generalization capability when handling previously unseen
queries. This implies that, in cross-domain scenarios (e.g., switching
between completely different query workloads, such as Stack [30]
and CEB [36]), LLMs with RFT are expected to generate hints in-
dicating better query plans than those without RFT. Several RFT
algorithms have been developed, such as Proximal Policy Optimiza-
tion (PPO) [45], Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) [42], and the
recently proposed Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) [46].
During fine-tuning, PPO relies on a trained value model to objec-
tively determine whether the generated output is preferred or
non_preferred. This value model introduces additional memory
requirements and computational overhead [46]. While DPO elim-
inates the need for a separate value model to reduce complexity,
it requires paired preference data (consisting of preferred and
non_preferred output) to guide the LLM’s optimization process.
Constructing such a preference-pair dataset before fine-tuning in-
troduces an additional workload for data labeling, which is complex
for our query optimization task. Moreover, although DPO increases
the relative probability of preferred completions compared to dis-
preferred ones, it may reduce the model’s absolute likelihood of
generating preferred completions [39].
To avoid these limitations, we rely on GRPO [46], a variant of
PPO that enhances computational efficiency and robustness. GRPO
incorporates group-based comparisons among generated responses
to eliminate the need for an explicit value model, as required by
PPO, and also removes the need for labeled data, as in DPO. GRPO
generates multiple outputs from the same prompt, computes re-
wards for these outputs based on the user-defined reward function,
and then evaluates their in-group advantages ˆ𝐴. Specifically, the
GRPO algorithm first fixes the current policy model1 as 𝜋𝜃old. This
naming distinguishes it from the policy model to be updated, 𝜋𝜃 .
Then, for each prompt x in the GRPO training dataset DGRPO, an
LLM generates a group of 𝐺 hint plans {ℎ1, ℎ2, . . . , ℎ𝐺 } based on
𝜋𝜃old. Then, these hints are executed with a database engine, and
their corresponding execution latencies are used to optimize the
policy model 𝜋𝜃 by maximizing the following objective:
JGRPO (𝜃 ) ≈ Ex∼DGRPO,{ℎ𝑖 }∼𝜋𝜃old
1
𝐺
𝐺∑︁
𝑖=1
(
𝑓
 𝜋𝜃 (ℎ𝑖 | x)
𝜋𝜃old (ℎ𝑖 | x) , 𝜖

ˆ𝐴𝑖 − 𝛽 DKL [𝜋𝜃 ∥𝜋ref]
)
(3)
where function 𝑓 and hyperparameter 𝜖 are employed to stabilize
fine-tuning [45]. To prevent the updated policy𝜋𝜃 from excessively
deviating from the initial policy denoted as reference policy 𝜋ref,
a Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence regularization [ 22, 46] term
weighted by the hyperparameter 𝛽 is applied.
2.5 Retrieval via Embedding Similarity
Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) [ 49] enhances large lan-
guage models (LLMs) by incorporating external knowledge re-
trieved from a vector database [ 56], thereby supplementing the
prompt with relevant information without altering the model’s
weights. This approach effectively mitigates the limitations im-
posed by the static knowledge of standalone LLMs. Consequently,
the selection of the most relevant content from the vector data-
base is critical to performance. To facilitate finer-grained control,
the retrieved content can be segmented into smaller, semantically
meaningful snippets when necessary [29, 43]. In our context, each
snippet corresponds to a reference query 𝑑𝑖, and we define the
full set of reference queries as follows: D = {𝑑1, 𝑑2, . . . , 𝑑𝑁 }. For
each reference query 𝑑𝑖, we use an encoder 𝜙 (·) to map it into a
𝑚-dimensional embedding space as: e𝑖 = 𝜙 (𝑑𝑖 ) ∈ R𝑚 . All embed-
dings can be organized into a matrix:E = [e1, e2, . . . , e𝑁 ] ∈ R𝑚×𝑁 .
Given an query u for vector database, its embedding is computed
as: eu = 𝜙 (u) ∈ R𝑚 . The similarity between u and each 𝑑𝑖 can be
1RFT treats the prompt as the environment state and each token generation as an
action. So we use the reinforcement learning policy model𝜋𝜃 notation rather than 𝑝𝜃 .
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
Liu et al.
computed using cosine similarity as follows:
sim(u, 𝑑𝑖 ) = e⊤u e𝑖
∥eu ∥ ∥ e𝑖 ∥ . (4)
Based on these similarity scores, we rank and pick the top 𝑘 refer-
ences to form the retrieved set R, where: R ⊂ D , |R | = 𝑘.
3 System Overview
In this section, we first formalize the definition of optimizing queries
using SEFRQO (Section 3.1). Then, we give an overview of the
SEFRQO’s workflow and its key components (Section 3.2).
3.1 Problem Statement
Our ultimate goal is to reduce query execution latency using hints
generated by LLMs. We achieve this through two complementary
phases: offline fine-tuning for the LLM abilities to generate hints , and
online in-context learning for the LLM to generate optimal hints .
Definition 1: Offline LLM Fine-tuning for Hints Generation.
In this phase, we aim at fine-tuning an LLM, parameterized by
𝜃LLM, such that, for any input SQL query 𝑄 ∈ Q and the relevant
database statistics stats that help plan the execution of this query
(e.g., table cardinalities), the LLM is able to generate a hint ℎ that
optimizes the execution of 𝑄, with the objectives of (1) ensuring
correct hint syntax (valid to become a plan) and (2) steering the
LLM’s preference towards generating hints that minimize query
execution latency. These objectives can be formally defined as:
arg max
𝜃LLM
EQ,stats

log 𝑝correct (ℎ)

(Syntax Correctness) (5)
arg min
𝜃LLM
EQ,stats

Latency(𝑄, ℎ)

(Latency Preference) (6)
where EQ,stats denotes the expectation over the joint data distri-
bution of input SQL queries Q and database statistics stats. This
offline fine-tuning phase is achieved using SFT (see Section 2.3) and
GRPO (see Section 2.4) as shown later.
Definition 2: Online LLM In-context Learning for Hints Gen-
eration. In this phase, for any input SQL query 𝑄 ∈ Q and its
relevant database statistics stats mentioned in Definition 1, we
aim at constructing an optimized prompt x∗ (noted as 𝑃 in this
section), during the runtime, that guides the fixed-parameter LLM
to generate a hint ℎ that minimizes the execution latency of this
query (i.e., ℎ ← LLM𝜃LLM (𝑃)). Formally, this corresponds to solving
the following optimization problem:
arg min
𝑃
Latency(𝑄, ℎ) (Prompt Optimization) (7)
The optimized prompt 𝑃 for any query is constructed based on the
relevant database statistics stats of this query and a few relevant
query references K that are dynamically retrieved from an up-to-
date RAG vector database (see Section 2.5), as shown later.
3.2 Overview of SEFRQO
Figure 1 shows the overview of SEFRQO, which comprises three
stages, each mapping to an optimization problem in Section 3.1.
Corresponding to Equation 5, the first stage is Supervised Fine-
Tuning (SFT) (see Section 4). SFT teaches the model the correct
format of query hints by training LLMs on a pre-constructed dataset
containing pairs of input prompts (user prompt as in Section 2.2)
Pre-T rained
LLM
Supervised
Fine-tuning
Learn Hint
Format From
Prepared Labels 
Q GRPO
Fine-tuning
Steer LLM Output
Preference with
Reward Functions 
Of fline Phase
V ecDB
Execution Engine (e.g., PostgreSQL)
Latency
Fine-tuning
Online  Phase
Fine-tuned
LLM
Dynamic
Prompt
Get Feedback,
Store Results
1 2
3
Self-evolving
Figure 1: System overview of SEFRQO.
and output hints (training set Dsft in Section 2.3). SFT lays the foun-
dation of our system because any further improvements depend on
LLMs’ ability to generate syntactically correct hints that a database
execution engine (e.g., PostgreSQL) can accept. Corresponding to
Equation 6, the second stage is Query Group Relative Policy
Optimization (Q𝐺𝑅𝑃𝑂 ) fine-tuning (see Section 5). In Q 𝐺𝑅𝑃𝑂 ,
we incorporate latency feedback from actual query executions us-
ing the database engine (training dataset DGRPO in Section 2.4).
By designing a latency-based reward model and employing group
relative advantage feedback, we steer LLMs’ preferences toward
generating hints with lower latency. As a reinforcement-learning
process in a dynamic environment, Q 𝐺𝑅𝑃𝑂 enhances reasoning
ability for unseen workloads. These first two stages occur during
the offline phase. Corresponding to Equation 7, the third stage is a
RAG-based Prompt Optimization online phase, where the out-
put prompt will be used to generate the final hint used for the query
optimization. In this phase, we maintain a continuously updated
RAG system incorporating live execution records (see Section 6).
For each query 𝑄, we dynamically construct a prompt containing
execution records of similar queries as references and the historical
execution analysis (see Section 6.4). Upon repeated encounters with
𝑄, the prompt is continuously optimized. This self-evolving proce-
dure enables SEFRQO to further minimize the execution latency.
4 SFT for Learning Hint Format
In this section, we primarily focus on employing supervised fine-
tuning to enable LLMs to understand the query optimization task
and to learn the expected hint format.
As mentioned in Section 2.3, we need to construct a training set
Dsft that consists of pairs of prompt x and corresponding generated
hint output ℎ∗ (i.e., labeled data). We define the Dsft collection
process in Algorithm 1. It shows the sequence of operations we
perform for each query 𝑄𝑖 ∈ Q 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛 to build the training set. Also,
Figure 2 shows a running example of the intermediate outputs of
these different operations. First, we execute the query 𝑄𝑖 using the
database execution engine to retrieve the detailed query execution
plan and its intermediate statistics E𝑖 (line 2) (using commands
like EXPLAIN ANALYZE in PostgreSQL). We return the plan in
a structured and nested JSON format to easily parse its details.
Figure 2 (Part 2) shows an example of the JSON output of only
some statistics of the “Aggregate” operator in the example query
(Note that the remaining statistics for the Aggregate operator and
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
SEFRQO: A Self-Evolving Fine-Tuned RAG-Based Query Optimizer
V isualization:
HJ : Hash Join
NL : Nested Loop Join
IS : Index Scan
SS : Sequential Scan
IOS : Index Only Scan
SQL  Query:
SELECT  ... FROM  
company_name AS cn, 
company_type AS ct, 
movie_companies AS mc, 
role_type AS rt, title AS t 
WHERE ct.id = mc.type_id ...
AND cn.country_code   = '[ru]';
Hint:
/*+ NestedLoop(mc cn t rt ct)
 NestedLoop(mc cn t rt)
 HashJoin(mc cn t) \n NestedLoop(mc cn)
 SeqScan(mc) \n IndexScan(cn)
 IndexScan(t) \n  SeqScan(rt)
 IndexOnlyScan(ct)
 Leading(((((mc cn) t) rt) ct)) */
Plan in JSON Format:
"Plan": {
    "Node T ype": "Aggregate",
    "Plans": [ Nested Children Node Plans ] },
     · · ·
    "Actual Rows":  90,     
    "Planning T ime": 1.045,
    "Execution T ime" : 153.547}
1 2 3
2
3
Root
Leaves
NL
NLIOS
HJIS
NLIS
SSIS
Figure 2: Given the SQL text and other information (Step 1), we extract the query hint from the query plan in the JSON format
(Step 2) and simplify the hint structure (Step 3). The rightmost sub-figure shows how we simplify the plan representation.
other operators are summarized in red as “Nested Children Node
Plans” for clarity). Then, we extract the tables T𝑖 used in 𝑄𝑖 and
get their cardinalities C𝑖 from the JSON output (lines 3 and 4).
Next, the original query 𝑄𝑖 is concatenated with the extracted
cardinalities C𝑖 to construct the prompt x𝑄𝑖 (line 5). Finally, we
obtain the generated hint ℎ∗ (i.e., labeled output) for the query 𝑄𝑖
(line 6), pair it with the constructed prompt x𝑄𝑖 , and add them
to the training set Dsft. Figure 2 (Part 3) shows an example of
the constructed hint for the plan tree structure highlighted in the
rightmost part of the figure. After obtaining Dsft = {( x𝑄𝑖 , ℎ∗
𝑖 )},
we maximize the conditional predictive probability 𝑝𝜃 (ℎ∗|x) of the
LLM as described in Section 2.3.
Algorithm 1 Supervised Fine-tuning Dataset Preparation
Input: Database engine DB , Training query set Q𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛 =
{𝑄1, 𝑄2, . . . , 𝑄𝑛 }
Output: SFT training dataset Dsft = {( x𝑄𝑖 , ℎ∗
𝑖 )}
1: for each 𝑄𝑖 ∈ Q 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛 do
2: E𝑖 ← DB (𝑄𝑖 ) ⊲ Generate execution record for 𝑄𝑖
3: T𝑖 ← ExtractTables(E𝑖 ) ⊲ Extract used tables
4: C𝑖 ← GetCardinalities(T𝑖, E𝑖 ) ⊲ Retrieve table cardinalities
5: x𝑄𝑖 ← ConstructPromptsft(𝑄𝑖, C𝑖 ) ⊲ Construct SFT prompt
6: ℎ∗
𝑖 ← ExtractHint(E𝑖 ) ⊲ Extract hint as label
7: Append (𝑥𝑖, ℎ∗
𝑖 ) to Dsft
8: Return Dsft
5 Query Group Relative Policy Optimization
This optimization stage further enhances the LLM’s ability to per-
form query optimization tasks by steering the model’s output
toward a query hint with reduced latency. We propose Query
Group Relative Policy Optimization (Q𝐺𝑅𝑃𝑂 ) based on GRPO [46]
to use reinforcement learning to continuously fine-tune 𝜃sft, which
was obtained from the previous supervised fine-tuning stage. The
key intuition is to have the LLM generate multiple hint outputs
{ℎ1, ℎ2, . . . , ℎ𝐺 } for a given promptx. Then, we use gradient descent
to update the model’s parameters by computing the in-group ad-
vantages of these hint outputs, which correspond to relative latency
improvement rewards in our context. As a result, the policy model
is optimized to an updated parameter set𝜃GRPO. Figure 3 illustrates
the Q𝐺𝑅𝑃𝑂 workflow and the latency-based reward paradigm.
5.1 Latency-based Reward Model
For a given query, the ultimate objective of query optimization
is to reduce the latency of the query plan. To directly leverage
LLM
Execution
Engine
Prompt
Input Queries
Q 1 Q 2
DB
Statistic
Query , Related
T able Information
h 1
h 2
...
h G
Same Query
Reward
Model
Latency of Default Plan
Actual
Latency
Latency Reward Paradigm
Multiple Query
Hint Outputs
Group Relative Advantage Feedback
Figure 3: Overview of the Q 𝐺𝑅𝑃𝑂 workflow with Latency-
based Reward Paradigm.
Algorithm 2 Latency-based Reward Model
Input: Query 𝑄, corresponding multiple LLM outputs as hint
plans{ℎ1, ℎ2, . . . , ℎ𝐺 }, latency reward function 𝑅Latency
Output: Rewards {𝑟1, 𝑟2, . . . , 𝑟𝐺 }
1: Baseline latency: 𝑡𝑑 ← ExecEngine(𝑄) ⊲ without hint
2: for each Hint Output 𝑖 ∈ { 1, 2, . . . , 𝐺} do
3: Actual latency: 𝑡𝑖 ← ExecEngine(𝑄, ℎ𝑖 ) ⊲ with hint
4: latency improvement ratio: △𝑡𝑖 ← 𝑡𝑑
𝑡𝑖 ⊲ Improvement rate
5: Latency reward: 𝑟𝑖 ← 𝑅Latency (△𝑡𝑖 )
6: Return: {𝑟1, 𝑟2, . . . , 𝑟𝐺 }
feedback on query execution latency, we propose a latency-based
reward model derived from real query execution and integrated
with reinforcement fine-tuning for LLMs.
Algorithm 2 illustrates the latency-based reward model used
in Q𝐺𝑅𝑃𝑂 . We compute the reward based on the actual latency
speedup relative to the baseline latency obtained by executing the
same query without any query hint. First, we execute the query
without applying a query hint on the database execution engine to
obtain the baseline latency𝑡𝑑 (line 1). Each LLM-generated hint out-
put ℎ𝑖 is concatenated with the query 𝑄 and executed to record the
actual latency 𝑡𝑖 (line 3). We then calculate the latency improvement
ratio △𝑡𝑖 as the ratio between the baseline latency 𝑡𝑑 and the actual
latency 𝑡𝑖 (line 4). A larger value of △𝑡𝑖 indicates a better query hint.
Finally, the latency reward 𝑟𝑖 is derived using the designed latency
reward function 𝑅Latency (line 5), which is defined as follows:
𝑅Latency (△𝑡𝑖 ) = tanh  ln(△𝑡𝑖 ) (8)
where the logarithmic function ln is introduced to achieve symme-
try reward. For example, a two-fold improvement (Δ𝑡𝑖 = 2) yields
ln(2) ≈ 0.693, while a two-fold degradation ( Δ𝑡𝑖 = 0.5) results
in ln(0.5) ≈ − 0.693. Although the logarithmic function dampens
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
Liu et al.
the effect of huge differences—since some excellent plans or poor
plans can lead to order-of-magnitude speedups or slowdowns—a
hyperbolic tangent function tanh is further employed to restrict
the reward range to the interval [−1, 1]. Even when the subsequent
procedure computes advantages based on in-group comparisons
along with the normalization in Equation 9, reducing the sensitiv-
ity of the reward to extreme deviations can improve the overall
stability of the fine-tuning procedure.
Suppose the current latency𝑡𝑖 is smaller than the baseline latency
𝑡𝑑. In that case, the latency improvement ratio is larger than 1
(△𝑡𝑖 > 1), leading to a positive reward in the end for this LLM-
generated output, and vice versa. These rewards guide the LLM’s
preferences toward generating hints that reduce query latency.
5.2 Group Relative Advantage Feedback
Another key process in Q𝐺𝑅𝑃𝑂 is the group relative advantage feed-
back. Based on the previously calculated rewards {𝑟1, 𝑟2, . . . , 𝑟𝐺 },
we compute the advantage 𝐴𝑖 for each hint response ℎ𝑖, reflecting
how much better or worse it is compared to others in the group:
𝐴𝑖 = 𝑟𝑖 − mean({𝑟1, 𝑟2, . . . , 𝑟𝐺 })
std({𝑟1, 𝑟2, . . . , 𝑟𝐺 }) (9)
Here, mean({𝑟1, 𝑟2, . . . , 𝑟𝐺 }) denotes the average reward of the
group, and std({𝑟1, 𝑟2, . . . , 𝑟𝐺 }) denotes the standard deviation of
rewards within the group. Subsequently, we compute the ratio of
the probability of generating the response ℎ𝑖 under the new policy
𝜋𝜃 to that under the old policy 𝜋𝜃old, denoted as 𝜋𝜃 (ℎ𝑖 |x)
𝜋𝜃old (ℎ𝑖 |x) . This
ratio indicates the degree to which the new policy diverges from
the old policy for a given response, thereby guiding the direction
of policy updates. Q𝐺𝑅𝑃𝑂 employs gradient descent to iteratively
maximize the optimization objective defined in Equation 3. The
simplified gradient2 used for updating model can be expressed as:
𝐺𝐶GRPO (x, ℎ, 𝜋𝜃 , 𝜋ref) = ˆ𝐴𝑖 + 𝛽
 𝜋ref(ℎ𝑖 | x)
𝜋𝜃 (ℎ𝑖 | x) − 1

(10)
Algorithm 3 presents the complete fine-tuning process of Q𝐺𝑅𝑃𝑂 .
This algorithm first initializes the policy model𝜋𝜃 and the reference
policy model 𝜋ref as 𝜋sft (line 1), and iterates over batches to update
𝜋𝜃 (lines 2–9). Specifically, we first save the current policy model as
𝜋𝜃old to distinguish it from an updating model 𝜋𝜃 (line 3). Then, the
LLM generates 𝐺 query hints as outputs {ℎ𝑖 }𝐺
𝑖=1 ∼ 𝜋𝜃old sampling
from the saved policy model 𝜋𝜃old (line 6). Next, we compute the
rewards {𝑟𝑖 }𝐺
𝑖=1 for each generated hint using the latency-based
reward model described in Section 5.1 (line 7). Then, we calculate
the group relative advantage {𝐴𝑖 }𝐺
𝑖=1 for each generation according
to Equation 9 (line 8). After computing these values for the batch,
we update the LLM parameters via gradient descent with 𝜋ref and
𝜋𝜃 by using Equation 10 (line 9).
6 RAG-based Prompt Optimization
After the previous offline fine-tuning procedures, we expect our
system to continuously evolve during the online stage to generate
query hints, which lead to lower query execution latency. For a fixed
fine-tuned LLM, different input prompts for the same query 𝑄 can
result in varying qualities of hint outputs, which in turn influence
2This simplified gradient assumes 𝜋𝜃old = 𝜋𝜃 , as in [46].
Algorithm 3 Query Group Relative Policy Optimization
Input: Initial policy model 𝜋𝜃sft, reward function 𝑟𝜙 , prompts P
Output: Optimized policy model 𝜋𝜃GRPO
1: 𝜋𝜃 ← 𝜋𝜃sft, 𝜋ref ← 𝜋𝜃sft ⊲ Initialization
2: for step = 1, . . . , 𝑀 do
3: Save current policy model by 𝜋𝜃old ← 𝜋𝜃
4: Sample a batch P𝑏 from P
5: for (query, table information) pair x = (𝑄, T ) ∈ P 𝑏 do
6: Sample G generated hints {ℎ𝑖 }𝐺
𝑖=1 ∼ 𝜋𝜃old (· | x)
7: Compute rewards {𝑟𝑖 }𝐺
𝑖=1 through 𝑟𝑖 = 𝑟𝜙 (ℎ𝑖 )
8: Compute relative advantage {𝐴𝑖 }𝐺
𝑖=1 via Equation 9
9: Update 𝜋𝜃 by maximizing the GRPO objective ⊲ via gradi-
ent descent in Equation 10, using 𝜋ref
10: Return: 𝜋𝜃 as 𝜋𝜃GRPO
Self-evolving Paradigm
VecDBSimilar Queries,
Statistics, Hints
LLM Execution
Engine
Plan HintDynamic
Prompts
Statistics
GetLower
Latency?
PerformanceFeedback
User QueriesQ1 Q2 ... Q1
Store Execution Records
FirstIteration?
Yes
No
InitialResults
Preparation      
Previous
Records
Initialization and Generation
Figure 4: Overview of SEFRQO’s RAG component.
the execution latency of the resulting query plans. As formalized
in Equation 7, by improving the prompt x to an optimized prompt
x∗, the LLM generates a query hint ℎ that minimizes the execution
latency for 𝑄. In this section, we present a RAG-based prompt
optimization method. Our RAG workflow dynamically constructs
the prompt x for the LLM based on historical execution records
of previously generated query plans. This self-evolving paradigm
enables online in-context learning for hint generation.
6.1 Architecture of Self-evolving RAG
Figure 4 illustrates the complete pipeline of SEFRQO’s RAG-based
prompt optimization (the self -evolving phase in Section 3.2). It
comprises three stages: Preparation, Initialization, and Generation.
During the Preparation stage, we collect previous query execu-
tion records (e.g., execution times and corresponding query plans
generated by PostgreSQL’s default optimizer). Notably, SEFRQO
does not require a predefined workload for this stage. All collected
records are loaded into the vector database (VecDB) to bootstrap the
system. These execution records serve as reference examples that
can be incorporated into the prompt x to enhance LLM generation.
After the Preparation stage, when a query 𝑄 is encountered for
the first time by our RAG system, it triggers the Initialization stage
(denoted by the dashed line). In this stage,𝑄 is executed directly on
the database engine (e.g., PostgreSQL without applying any query
hint ℎ), and the corresponding execution record is stored in VecDB.
For subsequent encounters with 𝑄, our RAG system enters the
Generation stage. Here, 𝑄 is sent to the database engine to extract
necessary statistics 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑠 (e.g., table cardinalities and filter selectivi-
ties) without actual execution. These statistics are then incorporated
6

=== PAGE 7 ===
SEFRQO: A Self-Evolving Fine-Tuned RAG-Based Query Optimizer
Id: 0
Execution Time: 300 ms
Vector: [0.1, 0.2, 0, ..., 0.2, 0.6]
Iteration: 0
SQL: 'select count(*) from ... AND 1925 < t.production_year'
Plan: '/*+ NestedLoop(mi1 it1 tkt ci rt n)\n ...  Leading(((((((mi1 it1) t) kt) ci)rt) n)) */'
SQL_id: 'ceb_1a'
Execution Time: 1234 ms
Vector: [0.3, 0.1, 0, ..., 0.9, 0.3]
SQL: 'select MIN(cn1.name)  ...= mc2.movie_id '
Plan: '/*+ NestedLoop(mi_idx it2mc ct t cn mi it1)\n...
 Leading((((((((mi_idx it2) mc)ct) t) cn) mi) it1)) */'
Id: 7Iteration: 4SQL_id: 'job_33b'
Figure 5: A visual example of storing execution records.
into the prompt x to provide additional context for better planning.
In parallel, 𝑄 is sent to VecDB to retrieve 𝑘 reference queries via
similarity search (as in Section 2.5), along with their execution
records. These reference records are also used to dynamically con-
struct the prompt x (see Section 6.3). Next, the LLM generates a
query hint ℎ based on this prompt. The query 𝑄, together with the
generated hint ℎ, is executed on the database engine. If the new
execution record achieves lower latency than the historical record
for 𝑄, the latest record replaces the old one in VecDB. If our RAG
system encounters the same query 𝑄 again, the stored current best
history record for 𝑄 is retrieved from VecDB and used to compute
feedback information (e.g., performance gain 𝜂 over PostgreSQL’s
default plan for 𝑄), which is then incorporated into the dynamic
prompt. This feedback paradigm drives continuous self-evolution,
iteratively improving future plan generation (see Section 6.4).
6.2 Vector Database Storage Design
Figure 5 shows how we store execution records in VecDB. For
each record, we maintain seven properties: Id, Iteration, Vector,
SQL_id, SQL, Plan, and Execution Time . Id serves as the primary
key. Iteration denotes the current iteration of the online pipeline;
for the Preparation and Initialization stages, it is set to 0 to distin-
guish them from the Generation stage, whose iterations begin at 1.
Vector contains the embedding of the originalSQL used for similar-
ity search. SQL_id is a unique identifier for each query, comprising
the benchmark name and the internal query name (e.g., job_33b).
It is used to distinguish the current query from its reference queries
during similarity search, ensuring that only similar yet distinct
queries are retrieved from the vector database. SQL denotes the raw
query text. Plan represents the query plan extracted from the exe-
cution record using the workflow in Figure 2. Finally,Execution
Time stores the actual execution latency.
When a new record arrives, our VecDB inserts it according to the
layout described above. To extract relevant information, the input
query 𝑄 is first encoded as a fixed-length vector using an encoder
model (e.g., SentenceTransformer [17]). Then, VecDB retrieves the 𝑘
most related queries {𝑄1, 𝑄2, . . . , 𝑄𝑘 } (or fewer if only fewer similar
queries exist) based on cosine similarity of their embeddings. Finally,
these queries and their associated execution records are used to
construct the dynamic prompt x.
## Y ou ar e a database expert performing the query optimization task
Description of query optimization task.
## Y ou can perform the following actions: Definition of actions.
## Y ou have these r estrictions on your  actions: Constraints on actions.
𝑆 𝑃 : System Prompt
## Her e is the {k} similar  query-answer  pairs you can r efer ence:
k pairs of reference query and corresponding execution plan
## Her e is the query and its corr esponding statistics:
Query SQL  and corresponding database statistics.
## The default execution plan pr ovided by the database engine:
Default execution plan of this query (without applying hints).
## The best historical query plan you generated and performance gain:
Best historical query plan and performance gain.
## Please generate a better query plan than provided references.
Not repetition, Stick to the correct format, .etc.
𝑈 𝑃 : User Prompt
Figure 6: Dynamic prompt in SEFRQO.
6.3 Dynamic Prompt Construction
Figure 6 illustrates the complete structure of the dynamic prompt
x = (SP ∥ UP). It begins with a static system prompt, SP, which
will not change. UP specifies the LLM’s role (e.g., database expert),
the actions the LLM should perform, and the regulations of these
actions in the context of our query optimization task. For a query𝑄,
SEFRQO generates a dynamic user prompt, UP, which initially
includes the 𝑘 most similar queries and their execution plans as
references. These records provide the LLM with strongly correlated
contextual information, as they represent the queries most similar
to 𝑄 in the embedding space derived from the SQL text. The LLM
can learn from these existing plans, even those for other queries,
to better construct a query hint ℎ for the input query 𝑄. Finally,
the query statistics 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑠 , containing table cardinalities and filter
selectivities, are appended to the prompt as additional context.
The following part of the user prompt contains the currently
generated best query plan for query 𝑄 and the corresponding per-
formance gain 𝜂 relative to the baseline execution record (i.e., 𝑄
executed without any hint ℎ during the Initialization stage). These
two items serve as heuristics for the LLM to understand the status
(i.e., relative performance gain) of the current hint ℎ and to target
an optimized hint ℎ∗. At the end of the user prompt, we add ex-
pectations and regulations for the LLM, including (1) generating a
better hint, (2) avoiding copying the plan provided by the execution
engine or its own historical hints, and (3) ensuring output in the
correct format so that the hint constitutes a valid plan.
6.4 Self-evolving Feedback Paradigm
The middle part of Figure 4 depicts the self-evolving feedback par-
adigm of SEFRQO. This paradigm enables the LLM to learn from
historical execution records of the same query 𝑄, thereby enhanc-
ing the current iteration’s generated hint ℎ. For example, when
we run the JOB 20a query [ 24] with SEFRQO, the partial default
query plan obtained from PostgreSQL during the Preparation stage
is NestedLoop(k mk) → NestedLoop(k mk cc) . Then, in the Gen-
eration stage (first iteration), SEFRQO generates a hint for the plan
NestedLoop(mk k) → NestedLoop(mk k t) . In later iterations
during the feedback process, the hint evolves toHashJoin(mk k) →
NestedLoop(mk k cc) . In this example, we observe that SEFRQO
identifies two key insights: (1) joining mk and k first is beneficial,
and performing this join with a HashJoin while adjusting the join
7

=== PAGE 8 ===
Liu et al.
Algorithm 4 Prompt Optimization in our RAG System
1: Input: Input query 𝑄, Previous prompt 𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑡
2: Output: Optimized prompt for current iteration 𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑡 ∗
3: ℎ ← LLM(𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑡 ) ⊲ Previous generated hint
4: 𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑛, 𝑡 ← ExecEngine(𝑄, ℎ) ⊲ Previous execution record
5: 𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑛 ∗, 𝑡∗ ← 𝐺𝑒𝑡𝐻𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙𝐵𝑒𝑠𝑡𝐸𝑥𝑒𝑐𝑢𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑇 𝑖𝑚𝑒 (𝑄)
6: if 𝑡 < 𝑡 ∗ then
7: 𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑛 ∗ ← 𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑛 ⊲ Update historical best plan
8: 𝑡 ∗ ← 𝑡 ⊲ Update historical best execution time
9: 𝑡𝑜 ← GetBaselineExecutionTime(𝑄) ⊲ Retrieve execution time
from record stored in the initialization stage from VecDB
10: Compute the performance gain: 𝜂 ← 𝑡𝑜 −𝑡 ∗
𝑡𝑜
11: UP ← UP ∪ {( 𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑛 ∗, 𝜂 )} ⊲ Insert historical best plan and its per-
formance gain into user prompt
12: 𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑡 ∗ ← ConstrcutPrompt(𝑆𝑃, 𝑈 𝑃)
13: Return 𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑡 ∗
order yields better efficiency than a NestedLoop; and (2) the nested
loop join NestedLoop(mk k t) is efficient and should be retained.
Algorithm 4 illustrates the cross-iteration prompt optimization
process (the straight line below line 8 indicates the separation
between previous and current iterations). Here, we use𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑡 and
𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑡 ∗ in place of the original notation x to denote the prompt
from the previous iteration and the optimized prompt used in the
current iteration, respectively. In the previous iteration part, we
obtain the generated hint ℎ by sending 𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑡 to LLM. Then, we
execute query 𝑄 with ℎ on the database engine to retrieve the
resulting query plan and its execution time (lines 3–4). We then
retrieve the historical best plan𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑛 ∗ and its execution time𝑡 ∗ from
VecDB (line 5). Finally, we compare the current iteration’s result
with the historical record, updating 𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑛 ∗ and 𝑡 ∗ if the current
execution is superior (lines 6–8).
After that, we retrieve the baseline execution time 𝑡𝑜 for query
𝑄 from VecDB (line 9). This time is stored during the Initialization
stage, representing the query executed without applying any hint.
We then compute the performance gain 𝜂 of the historical best
execution time 𝑡 ∗ over the baseline, 𝜂 = (𝑡𝑜 − 𝑡 ∗)/𝑡𝑜 (line 10). Note
that if 𝑡 ∗ > 𝑡𝑜, then 𝜂 < 0, indicating that the current best plan
performs worse than the baseline. We merge the best plan plan∗
and 𝜂 into the user prompt 𝑈 𝑃 (as in Section 6.3) to provide useful
information guiding LLM generation (line 11). Finally, we construct
the optimized prompt 𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑡 ∗ by concatenating the static system
prompt 𝑆𝑃 and the dynamically updated user prompt 𝑈 𝑃 (line 12).
This optimized prompt, 𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑡 ∗, prevents the LLM from re-
peating the performance pitfall encountered with the previously
generated hint ℎ and continuously inspires the LLM to produce
an optimal hint ℎ∗. As the pipeline runs iteratively, feedback from
hints generated in earlier iterations drives the self -evolving pro-
cess. Meanwhile, the reference queries stored in VecDB are continu-
ously updated, further enhancing the effectiveness of the references.
These components iteratively optimize the prompt 𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑡 ∗, mo-
tivating the LLM to generate an optimized hint ℎ∗ that minimizes
the execution latency for query 𝑄.
7 Evaluation
We first introduce our experimental setup in Section 7.1. Then, we
evaluate SEFRQO using different benchmarks and multiple LLMs
to address the following questions: (1) What is the performance
gain over PostgreSQL and current LQOs in static and dynamic sce-
narios (Section 7.2)? (2) How effective is SEFRQO’s self-evolving
RAG feedback paradigm (Section 7.3)? (3) What is the effect of SFT
and Q𝐺𝑅𝑃𝑂 on the quality of generated plans (Sections 7.4)? (4)
What is the overhead of SEFRQO and which factors influence it
(Section 7.5)? (5) How do different system settings affect the perfor-
mance of SEFRQO (Section 7.6)? (6) How does SEFRQO perform
under various scenarios (Section 7.7)? SEFRQO is open-source 3.
7.1 Experiment Setup
Environment. Unless mentioned otherwise, we run all our ex-
periments on one server with an AMD Ryzen 9700X CPU, 128 GB
of RAM, and an NVIDIA A6000 GPU with 48GB of memory. We
conducted the majority of our experiments on PostgreSQL (version
16.4) with the corresponding pg_hint_plan version, and employed
MySQL (version 8.4) [33] to assess SEFRQO’s cross-DBMS capabil-
ity. We use the Milvus [56] vector database for our RAG process.
We evaluated SEFRQO using 6 local LLMs: LLaMA3.1-3B ( L3B),
LLaMA3.1-8B (L8B), their two SFT versions (LS3B, LS8B), and their
two SFT-plus-Q𝐺𝑅𝑃𝑂 versions (LSG3B, LSG8B). We warm up the
machine before running the experiments to mitigate caching issues.
We use SentenceTransformer4 as the embedding model to embed
the plain SQL to a vector representation in our retrieval process.
SEFRQO Variants. We evaluate three variants of SEFRQO: (1) the
default configuration, which leverages the full-plan hint in combi-
nation with reference queries retrieved from the vector database;
(2) a variant that utilizes only the join order component of the hint
(the “Leading” clause as detailed in Section 2.1), referred to asJO;
and (3) a variant that relies exclusively on the historical execution
records of the current query 𝑄 itself, without incorporating any
reference queries from the RAG, referred to as NR. For clarity, we
denote models using these configurations with suffixes, e.g., an
LSG3B model employing the NR variant is denoted as LSG3B-NR.
Unless mentioned, the number of retrieved reference queries is
fixed at 𝑘 = 1. The effect of varying 𝑘 is investigated in Section 7.6.
LQO Baselines. We compare SEFRQO with two state-of-the-art
LQOs: Bao [30] and Balsa [61]. Bao is a steering LQO that tunes
query plans generated by traditional optimizers through a learned
model that selects different hint sets to enable/disable some op-
erators like Hash Join, Index Scan, etc. Balsa is a generative LQO
that learns a model to construct the query plan from scratch. For
LLM-based LQOs, due to the lack of available complete code for
LLM-QO [50] and LLMOpt [ 62], we were unable to successfully
reproduce their experiments. The only available LLM-based LQO
implementation is LLMSteer [2], which we use as our primary base-
line for evaluation in this category. LLMSteer uses a text-embedding
LLM to generate an embedding vector for the input SQL query and
performs predictions using simple neural networks. To have a fair
3https://github.com/ihanwen99/SEFRQO
4Paraphrase-MiniLM-L6-v2 Model.
8

=== PAGE 9 ===
SEFRQO: A Self-Evolving Fine-Tuned RAG-Based Query Optimizer
comparison, we follow the best configurations of all baselines as
mentioned in their papers5.
Evaluation Metrics. We focus mainly on the following metrics:
(1) Performance Gain in Query Execution Latency: In this metric, we
measure the performance gain over PostgreSQL. We compute this
performance gain in two modes. The first mode is Overall Per-
formance Gain, where we calculate the weighted sum of the per-
formance gains in “all” the workload queries using SEFRQO (or
any LQO) over using PostgreSQL. The weight of each query is
the ratio between its corresponding execution time and the to-
tal time of all workload queries when running with PostgreSQL.
The second mode is Filtered Performance gain , where the gain is
calculated the same way, yet over the queries that have been ac-
celerated “only”. (2)Relative Execution Time (RET): In this metric,
we compute the ratio between the overall execution time of all
the queries using SEFRQO (or any LQO) and using PostgreSQL.
(3) Inference and RAG Retrieval Latency: These metrics measure the
latency overhead of the LLM inference and the RAG retrieval from
the vector database. (4) Homogeneous Rate (HR): We assess the di-
versity of LLM-generated hints by calculating the ratio between (i)
the number of invalid hints or hints identical to those plans gener-
ated by the PostgreSQL and (ii) the total number of generated hints.
A higher HR indicates that the model is either generating invalid
hints (rejected by the database as plans) or producing repetitive
hints that copy the execution engine’s own plans. Note that we do
not distinguish between invalid hints and the execution engine’s
default plans because invalid hints result in the same default plans,
making them indistinguishable in practice. Evaluating the diversity
of hints generated by LLMs is essential because only distinct hints
can effectively influence the database’s execution behavior.
For all evaluation metrics, we use ↑ to denote “the higher, the
better, ” and↓ to denote “the lower, the better. ” These symbols will
be consistently used across all figures and tables.
Benchmarks. We use the Join Order Benchmark (JOB) [24] work-
load to (1) fine-tune the LS3B, LS8B, LSG3B, and LSG8B models and
(2) pre-populate the retrieval corpus in the RAG system with query-
answer examples during the preparation phase. Subsequently, we
evaluate SEFRQO on two workloads: the Cardinality Estimation
Benchmark (CEB) [36] and Stack [30]. Both JOB and CEB are con-
structed on the IMDB movie database schema and data, with CEB
containing more complex query patterns and a wider range of
cardinality estimation challenges than JOB. The Stack workload
is derived from the Stack Overflow dataset; while its query style
bears similarity to the IMDB-based workloads, it features a greater
number of slow queries. Additionally, TPC-DS benchmark [4] is
used to test SEFRQO on complex workloads. We use a scale factor
of 4, consistent with prior work [6]. For CEB, we use two queries
per template; for Stack, five queries per template; and for TPC-DS,
one query per template. To prevent poorly optimized plans from
excessively blocking the benchmarking, we enforce the following
timeout thresholds for different benchmark: 10s for the JOB and
CEB workloads, 30s for Stack, and 60s for TPC-DS.
5Balsa disables Bitmap Scan, Tid Scan, and Genetic Query Optimizer.
7.2 Query Execution Latency Evaluation
In this section, we focus on the performance gain in query execution
latency for each query during a 50-iteration run of SEFRQO. We
evaluate on both static and dynamic scenarios. In static scenarios,
we keep using the same workload for all iterations during the online
stage. The first static scenario employs the CEB workload, which
is used to test SEFRQO under a different setup while retaining
the same schema and data distribution. The second static scenario
employs the Stack workload, which is entirely different from the
JOB workload that is used for fine-tuning, and is used to verify
SEFRQO’s cross-domain transfer capability (i.e., workload switch).
The dynamic scenario comprises a mixture of the CEB, JOB, and
Stack workloads, alternating across different episodes. For each
episode, one workload is selected randomly and executed for a
number of iterations. We set 10 episodes and randomly allocate
iterations to each episode, enforcing a total of 50 iterations.
p0 p25 p50 p75 p90 p95 p99 p100
Percentile
101
102
103
Query latency (ms)
11
100
363
499
1053
1219
2024
2431
13
159
462
1195
2864
4042
6590 6921
SEFRQO
PostgreSQL
(a) LS8B (CEB)
p0 p25 p50 p75 p90 p95 p99 p100
Percentile
101
102
103
Query latency (ms)
12
100
362
596
1354
2261
2656 2733
13
152
449
1190
2849
3984
6414 6674
SEFRQO
PostgreSQL (b) LSG8B (CEB)
p0 p25 p50 p75 p90 p95 p99 p100
Percentile
101
102
103
104
Query latency (ms)
3
18
60
289
732
4318
13369
18124
6
21
78
321
1288
10152
13891
19701
SEFRQO
PostgreSQL
(c) LS8B (Stack)
p0 p25 p50 p75 p90 p95 p99 p100
Percentile
101
102
103
104
Query latency (ms)
3
18
60
309
801
4277
13545
18896
6
23
92
347
1463
10948
16803
22605
SEFRQO
PostgreSQL (d) LSG8B (Stack)
Figure 7: Query latency distributions on CEB and Stack.
Performance on Static Workloads. Table 1 presents the perfor-
mance gains achieved on static workloads. The comparison baseline
is PostgreSQL’s default query plan. For LQOs, both Balsa and Bao
are trained and evaluated on the same workload (either CEB or
Stack). On the CEB workload, SEFRQO with the LS8B model ex-
hibits superior performance relative to the other models, and it
outperforms LQOs. This result also suggests that fine-tuning is
crucial, as the vanilla models (L3B and L8B) show significantly less
improvement compared with models that have undergone super-
vised fine-tuning (LS3B and LS8B). Interestingly, a slight perfor-
mance degradation is observed when applying Q 𝐺𝑅𝑃𝑂 after the
SFT process. This is because SFT-based LLMs benefit the most (i.e.,
leverage the maximum of the fine-tuned knowledge) when they get
fine-tuned and tested on similar workloads, such as JOB and CEB.
However, when SEFRQO confronts an unseen workload that differs
significantly from the fine-tuning workload (as shown right below
with the Stack workload) or when the RAG support is disabled
(as shown in Section 7.4), SFT-plus-Q 𝐺𝑅𝑃𝑂 models demonstrate
their advantages that stem from the exploratory nature of rein-
forcement fine-tuning, which enhance the reasoning capabilities
of larger LLMs to handle such challenging situations. On Stack
9

=== PAGE 10 ===
Liu et al.
Table 1: Performance gain in static scenarios ↑.
Workload Performance Gain Balsa Bao L3B L8B LS3B LS8B LSG3B LSG8B
CEB Overall 37.57% 22.60% 7.46% 21.78% 53.93% 60.04% 50.13% 48.36%
Filtered 59.22% 30.13% 17.93% 47.56% 56.76% 65.05% 55.34% 61.28%
Stack Overall 67.17% 76.90% 5.54% 15.21% 40.10% 26.77% 39.62% 32.58%
Filtered 89.83% 82.85% 9.16% 37.38% 43.29% 87.68% 42.77% 93.57%
10 20 30 40 50
Iteration
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0Relative Execution Time
Balsa
L3B
L8B
LS3B
LS8B
LSG3B
LSG8B
Figure 8: RET on CEB workload across iterations ↓.
10 20 30 40 50
Iteration
1
2
3
4
5
6Relative Execution Time
Balsa
L3B
L8B
LS3B
LS8B
LSG3B
LSG8B Figure 9: RET on Stack workload across iterations ↓.
workload, both the SFT and SFT-plus-Q𝐺𝑅𝑃𝑂 models exhibit good
performance. Even though the LLMs have never seen this workload
before, the filtered performance gains for LS8B and LSG8B are com-
parable to those of Balsa or outperform it. Notably, these LQOs are
trained on Stack for 50 iterations. This scenario also demonstrates
the remarkable knowledge-transfer capabilities of SEFRQO with the
SFT and SFT-plus-Q𝐺𝑅𝑃𝑂 models, as evidenced by the substantial
performance gains they achieve over their vanilla counterparts.
Figure 7 compares the query latency distributions on both CEB
and Stack workloads. SEFRQO consistently outperforms PostgreSQL
across all percentiles, indicating that it benefits the majority of
queries and steadily reduces their latency. In particular, on the CEB
workload, SEFRQO is especially effective at optimizing long-tail
(high-percentile) queries, achieving approximately 2.5× speedup.
Comparison against LLM-based LQOs. As mentioned in Section 7.1,
we experiment with LLMSteer [2] as a representative for LLM-based
LQOs. However, it is not fully integrated into a database engine
and requires workloads to be preprocessed into a specific format
(CSV files containing the SQL file name, raw SQL text, a mapping
between hint lists and runtime lists, and a special representation
of the query plan), without publicly available source code for that
preprocessing. The authors only provided preprocessed files for
the JOB and CEB workloads. Therefore, we only reproduced LLM-
Steer under the same setup as the first static scenario: training on
the JOB workload and evaluating on the CEB workload. LLMSteer
achieves an Overall Performance Gain (i.e., improvement across all
queries) of 45.14%, while SEFRQO achieves 60.04%. Although LLM-
Steer’s embedding-based generation and specialized architecture
offer faster inference, they result in lower overall performance.
Performance on Dynamic Scenario. Table 2 shows the capability
of SEFRQO to handle changing workloads. Notably, most existing
LQOs do not support dynamic workloads, as their model archi-
tectures are typically tied to the schema of the training workload.
However, since Bao can accommodate various schemas, we include
it in this experiment. In general, larger LLMs yield better results,
and SFT is crucial for enhancing performance. Since approximately
two-thirds of the workloads originate from the IMDB schema (i.e.,
JOB and CEB workloads), the dominance of familiar patterns may
diminish the effectiveness of SFT-plus-Q𝐺𝑅𝑃𝑂 models, which tend
to perform better on substantially different workloads such as Stack.
Additionally, we can see that Bao underperforms compared to SE-
FRQO, and exhibits a significant performance drop relative to its
results in static settings. These results demonstrate the superiority
of SEFRQO in handling dynamic workloads, effectively eliminating
reliance and constraints associated with specific workloads.
Table 2: Performance gain in dynamic scenario ↑.
Model Performance Gain
Overall Filtered
L3B 2.64% 20.11%
L8B 15.92% 54.83%
LS3B 50.25% 58.65%
LS8B 53.25% 69.98%
LSG3B 33.88% 46.38%
LSG8B 38.83% 51.38%
Bao 14.82% 31.36%
7.3 Self-evolving Feedback Paradigm
In this section, we shift our focus to the overall execution latency
for all queries in each iteration. We use the RET metric to measure
the execution time ratio of SEFRQO compared to PostgreSQL.
Figure 8 shows the self-evolving process under the CEB work-
load. Among all evaluated models, SEFRQO with LS8B exhibits the
best performance, achieving the lowest RET of 0.41. It also shows a
trend and potential for continuous decrease with additional itera-
tions. In contrast, SEFRQO with vanilla models (L3B, L8B) shows
only marginal performance gains throughout the entire process.
Notably, SEFRQO with L8B exhibits minor fluctuations, SEFRQO
with L3B remains largely unchanged. This behavior likely results
from L3B consistently generating the same query hint, thereby
10

=== PAGE 11 ===
SEFRQO: A Self-Evolving Fine-Tuned RAG-Based Query Optimizer
LS8B LS3B LSG8B LSG3B L8B L3B
Models
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00Ratio
1.30
1.84
1.71
1.12
0.99 1.00
0.37 0.31 0.37
0.17
1.00 1.00
Relative Execution Time
Homogeneous Rate
Figure 10: RET and HR for investigating fine-tuning effects
(on the first iteration of SEFRQO) ↓.
failing to effectively utilize information from the dynamic prompt
we construct. However, this phenomenon is mitigated with larger
LLMs, which actively absorb input and generate more varied hints.
This experiment further proves that domain-specific fine-tuning
plays a crucial role in SEFRQO. Both LS3B and LS8B outperform
their vanilla counterparts; however, LS3B demonstrates notable in-
stability compared to LS8B, with performance fluctuation observed
several times across all iterations. This phenomenon may indicate
that smaller LLMs with supervised fine-tuning exhibit higher insta-
bility than larger models in our self-evolving paradigm.
Now, let us switch the perspective to compare SEFRQO with
LQOs. Balsa achieves only limited performance improvements over
the baseline (denoted by the black dashed line) within each iter-
ation. Although Balsa achieves promising results in the previous
evaluations (i.e., by gathering the best queries among all iterations,
as shown in Table 1), these improved queries are scattered across
different iterations. This indicates that within 50 iterations, Balsa
does not consistently generate high-performance query plans in the
same iteration, which means Balsa requires more iterations to reach
peak performance. This is more obvious in Figure 9 when testing
on the Stack workload: Balsa fails to outperform the baseline within
our iteration range despite exhibiting a trend towards performance
improvement over iterations.
As Figure 9 shows, LLMs exhibit more stable evolving progress
(i.e., lower variance and fewer fluctuations across iterations) on the
Stack workload compared to their behavior on the CEB workload.
This may originate from the fact that the LLMs are not fine-tuned
on the Stack workload, causing them to be more cautious and
reluctant to substantially change their behaviors in generating hints.
Consequently, it enables a smaller model to outperform a larger
model. As evidence, LS3B and LSG3B are unable to surpass LS8B on
the CEB workload, but they ultimately achieve better performance
than LS8B on the Stack workload. In this scenario, LSG3B with
𝑄GRPO fine-tuning achieves the best performance.
7.4 SFT and Q 𝐺𝑅𝑃𝑂 Effects
Previous experiments verify SEFRQO’s collaborative capability by
combining LLM fine-tuning with the self -evolving paradigm. In
this section, we focus on the plan generation ability based on LLM’s
internal reasoning, without involving the self-evolving paradigm
introduced by RAG. We follow the initial setup, where dynamic
prompts include only PostgreSQL execution records, excluding the
best plan or performance gain, and evaluate using RET and HR.
Figure 10 shows the results for different LLMs on the CEB static
workload (as in Section 7.2). Both vanilla LLMs (i.e., L8B and L3B)
primarily replicate PostgreSQL’s default execution plans or repeat-
edly generate invalid hints and fall back to the PostgreSQL plan,
yielding performance similar to PostgreSQL’s plan (i.e., RET close
to 1) and a high homogeneity rate (i.e., HR close to 1). In contrast,
the fine-tuned LLMs produce more diverse plans (i.e., lower HR),
favoring exploration over simply copying the input query plan. This
indicates an improvement in the reasoning abilities. Even when
the initial plan is suboptimal (i.e., higher RET), our self-evolving
paradigm reduces the final RET (see Figures 7 and 8).
We observe the pronounced Q𝐺𝑅𝑃𝑂 effect in the 3B models: from
LS3B to LSG3B, both the HR and RET decrease further. This shows
that Q𝐺𝑅𝑃𝑂 enhances the models’ reasoning abilities, enabling
3B-level models to generate more diverse and superior query hints.
Notably, LSG3B even outperforms the larger LS8B model on both
metrics. This demonstrates that a successful Q 𝐺𝑅𝑃𝑂 fine-tuning
process can steer the model’s output preferences to achieve better
task-specific performance compared to larger LLMs without Q𝐺𝑅𝑃𝑂 .
Given that Q𝐺𝑅𝑃𝑂 is based on reinforcement learning, it introduces
inherent uncertainty into LLM fine-tuning processes, which may
require multiple fine-tuning runs to obtain a reliable model. For ex-
ample, we show that the LSG8B model does not show improvement
over LS8B. This may be attributed to the more complex reasoning
nature of 8B models, which prevents them from demonstrating
superiority without the self-evolving RAG paradigm.
7.5 Inference and RAG Retrieval Time
This experiment evaluates the overhead incurred by LLM infer-
ence and RAG retrieval. We analyze these overheads for SEFRQO
using the LS3B model. The LLM inference time is approximately
236 ms on an NVIDIA A6000 and 160 ms on an NVIDIA A100. The
average RAG retrieval latency is 0.7 ms. We find that the dominant
overhead arises from LLM inference, which can be mitigated by
using powerful GPUs. Furthermore, considering execution time
savings (with SEFRQO’s query plans for the CEB workload aver-
aging 520.67 ms compared to PostgreSQL’s922.86 ms), SEFRQO’s
end-to-end latency still remains lower for OLAP.
Inference time of LLMs is also positively correlated with output
length. In our experiments, we observed two types of erroneous
hint generation. Although PostgreSQL will reject such hints, we
still incur a much longer hint generation. Figure 11 presents the two
most classic errors. The first is Repeated Text Chunks, where the
generated hint repeatedly includes the same table names multiple
times. The second is Bracket Mismatching, in which excessive
and unbalanced parentheses are generated. One direct implication
is to incorporate a validation procedure during inference: when an
unusable hint is generated, the process can be aborted promptly to
reduce inference time.
11

=== PAGE 12 ===
Liu et al.
10 20 30 40 50
Iteration
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Homogeneous Rate
LS3B
LSG3B
LSG3B-JO
LSG3B-NR
(a) HR ↓.
10 20 30 40 50
Iteration
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5Relative Execution Time
LS3B
LSG3B
LSG3B-JO
LSG3B-NR (b) RET ↓.
Figure 12: Evaluation on the static CEB workload.
10 20 30 40 50
Iterations on Original IMDB Dataset
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0Relative Execution Time
LSG8B-noise
LS8B-noise
LSG8B
LS8B
Figure 13: RET for data distribution shifting situations ↓.
Repeated Text Chunks:/*+ ... HashJoin(n mi mi ... mi mi mi) ... */Bracket Mismatching:
/*+  Leading((((((((((((((s t) tq) q) */
Figure 11: Two classical errors during LLMs’ generations,
unneeded output characters increase inference time.
Table 3: Performance gain on static CEB workload ↑.
Performance Gain LS3B LSG3B LSG3B-JO LSG3B-NR
Overall 53.93% 50.13% 24.81% 41.26%
Filtered 56.76% 55.34% 48.65% 52.61%
7.6 Ablation Studies
In this section, we focus on 3B models and evaluate several config-
urations to assess their impact on SEFRQO.
Generation Mode. Figure 12a depicts the HR for each iteration.
We observe that LSG3B-JO achieves a higher HR (approximately
70%) than the other configurations. These results indicate that when
LLM in SEFRQO is constrained to generate only a join-order hint,
it mainly reproduces or approximates the default plan provided
by the execution engine and is reluctant to propose new hints
to improve performance. Table 3 presents the performance gains
over the baseline, comparing LSG3B with LSG3B-JO. The results
demonstrate that the full-plan hint generation mode is substantially
more effective than the JO mode.
Similar Queries as Reference. A key feature of our system is
extracting reference queries by similarity search and integrating
them into the prompt for in-context learning. This experiment
evaluates its impact. Comparing LSG3B with LSG3B-NR, Table 3
reports the performance gain and Figure 12b presents the RET.
These results indicate that LSG3B consistently outperforms LSG3B-
NR, demonstrating the effectiveness of our design.
How Many References are the Best Setup?We evaluate SEFRQO
with LS3B on the CEB static workload by varying 𝑘 (the number of
reference queries in the prompt) from 1 to 3 and assess the impact on
performance. Table 4 presents the performance gains and the lowest
HR for each configuration. Observing theHR metric, we find that as
𝑘 increases, more enriched prompts lead the LLM to generate more
dynamic hints that deviate from the default reference query plan.
However, the performance gain does not improve monotonically
with 𝑘, indicating that too few or too many reference queries may
lead to a suboptimal solution. Too few references leave SEFRQO
lacking key information that could benefit performance, while too
many references may confuse the LLM and cause performance
degradation.
Table 4: Performance gain ↑ and HR ↓ for different 𝑘.
𝑘 Performance Gain Optimal HR
Overall Filtered
1 53.93% 56.76% 0.26
2 57.75% 62.16% 0.20
3 57.99% 58.87% 0.14
The above ablation studies confirm the crucial role of reference
queries in the prompt. They help identify the optimal hyperparam-
eter 𝑘 and generation mode for SEFRQO, showing that a moderate
prompt length balances inference latency and performance.
7.7 Extra Investigations
Handling Complex Queries. To evaluate the capability of SE-
FRQO to handle complex workloads, we choose TPC-DS [4] as a
representative benchmark. We replace our local LLMs with GPT-o3-
mini [37], which is expected to deliver better performance due to
its larger number of model parameters. SEFRQO achieves a 13.28%
Overall Performance Gain and a 27.81% Filtered Performance Gain.
Out of 99 queries, 28 have used new query plans from SEFRQO.
Table 5 shows the performance gain for the top 5 queries. The query
from template 10 has the highest performance gain at 90.63%.
Table 5: Top 5 performance gains in TPC-DS queries ↑.
Query Original Performance Gain Reduced Time
10 6537.78 ms 90.63% 5925.19 ms
17 3867.00 ms 71.79% 2776.12 ms
25 3024.58 ms 52.59% 1590.32 ms
16 18866.41 ms 28.80% 5433.53 ms
79 535.55 ms 27.27% 146.04 ms
Resilience to Inaccurate Cardinality. Cardinality estimation is
important for query optimization; inaccurate cardinality could lead
to sub-optimal query plans. Therefore, it’s necessary to investigate
its effect on SEFRQO. We evaluate the static CEB workload by
perturbing each filter and table’s cardinality using a random scaling
12

=== PAGE 13 ===
SEFRQO: A Self-Evolving Fine-Tuned RAG-Based Query Optimizer
factor 𝑛. When the original estimate is≥ 10, 𝑛 is sampled uniformly
from [−1, 1]; otherwise, from [0, 1]. Note that the database itself
remains unchanged; only manual estimation errors are introduced
in the prompt. When using LSG8B, SEFRQO achieves a 51.50%
Overall Performance Gain and a 57.11% Filtered Performance Gain;
when using LS8B, it achieves 50.26% and 54.48%, respectively. A
slight degradation can be obeserverd, however, SEFRQO is still
comparable to the static experiment in Section 7.2.
Robustness under Data Drift. Here, we study how well SEFRQO
can handle drifts in the underlying data over time. Besides the orig-
inal IMDB database, we construct a downsized version containing
only records dated after the year 2000. We evaluate SEFRQO on the
CEB workload by alternating between these two databases every
5 iterations, and other conditions are just the same as Section 7.2.
Figure 13 presents the execution times over 50, showing only the 5
iterations that use the original database in each alternation cycle,
to allow comparison with the corresponding static environment.
We observe more frequent spikes, indicating that feedback from the
downsized distribution interferes with SEFRQO’s self-evolution pro-
cess. Nevertheless, for the LS8B model, this variance occasionally
leads to the least execution times in some iterations.
Effect of Different Similarity Calculation Methods. In SE-
FRQO, we employ cosine similarity to retrieve similar queries as
in-context learning examples. Besides, we also evaluate inner prod-
uct and 𝐿2 distance similarity. On the static CEB workload, SEFRQO
with LSG8B using default cosine similarity yields approximately
an average of 3% greater performance gain than the other meth-
ods. Interestingly, inner product introduces the highest variance in
generated query plans, producing 150 more distinct plans over 50
iterations compared to the other methods.
Can SEFRQO Operate with Different DBMSes? We evaluate
SEFRQO with LSG8B on MySQL using the CEB workload to test
whether the knowledge can be transferred between different DBM-
Ses. Although these LLMs are supervised fine-tuned on PostgreSQL’s
hint format, we apply a simple hint translator (We translate hints
from PostgreSQL to MySQL by picking each table in a sequence
from the "Leading" clause to generate a join order to change MySQL’s
behavior) and achieve an Overall Performance Gain of 26.28% and
a Filtered Performance Gain of 30.98%. These results demonstrate
that SEFRQO can perform effectively in a cross-DBMS environment.
8 Related Work
Non-LLM Learned Query Optimizers. In recent years, Learned
Query Optimizers (LQOs) have experienced significant advance-
ments, with a variety of neural architectures—such as Tree-CNNs [30,
31, 61], Tree-LSTMs [64, 66], and GNNs [5, 7] which are employed to
serve as cost predictors or evaluators within these systems. Broadly
speaking, LQOs can be categorized based on their generation par-
adigm into two types: steering and generative categories. In the
steering category, the LQO refines query plans generated by tradi-
tional optimizers using neural networks. Bao [30] adjusts the tradi-
tional query optimizer behavior by enabling/disabling the different
hint sets that this optimizer can choose from. LEON [9] employs
a ranking-based approach combined with uncertainty-driven ex-
ploration to enhance the query execution performance. LOGER [7]
leverages a graph transformer along with a beam search strategy
to achieve improved execution speedups. Lero [69] uses a relative-
ranking-based method to choose the optimal plan. To sum up, this
type has the advantage of being minimally invasive, preserving the
core logic of the database engines and reducing the risk of produc-
ing poorly performing plans. However, these LQOs are inherently
limited by the capabilities of the traditional optimizers they rely
on. In the generative category, the LQO directly controls the plan
generation process. Balsa [61] and Neo [31] use the same neural
network structure to generate the query plan step by step using
reinforcement learning. Neo uses the typical Tree-CNN, and Balsa
adds a simulation strategy to boost the performance. Lemo [32] uses
a shared buffer manager component and a plan search algorithm to
generate a better plan. These strategies allow for exploring a wider
range of execution plans, which can lead to the discovery of more
efficient execution. Nevertheless, this greater flexibility also intro-
duces higher variability and potential instability in performance.
LLMs and RAG for Databases. LLMs demonstrate strong per-
formance across various NLP tasks [ 20, 21, 35], and are increas-
ingly applied to database tasks such as knob tuning [13, 19, 23, 51],
Text-to-SQL [12, 18], code generation [54], and schema understand-
ing [53]. DBBert [ 51] and GPTuner [ 23] use LLMs to interpret
database documents for knob tuning. There is potential to integrate
query-level planning and optimization with system-level knob tun-
ing in SEFRQO, a combination rarely explored in previous work
because these two approaches are typically considered orthogo-
nal. CARD [44] and GPT-DB [52] leverage LLMs to generate re-
lational data analytics code and SQL pipelines for data analysis.
PICARD [44] further enforces SQL syntax through incremental
constraint decoding, while CAESURA [55] translates natural lan-
guage into hybrid query plans combining SQL and Python UDFs.
Similarly, RAG has been widely applied to tasks such as text gen-
eration [15, 34], visual question answering [ 8, 25], code synthe-
sis [10, 20, 27], and recently, it has been used to effectively address
many challenges in the database domain. For example, in SQL gener-
ation, systems like [47] improve accuracy by retrieving structurally
similar queries and schema context. Query rewriting also benefits
from RAG; approaches like Rafe [28] retrieve prior rewrite examples
to transform natural language queries into efficient, semantically
equivalent forms, often surpassing traditional optimizer rules [48].
In text-to-SQL, ReFSQL [67] reduces hallucinations by retrieving
relevant question–SQL pairs to guide generation.
Recently, three early trials to explore the LLM in the query opti-
mization context, LLMSteer [2], LLM-QO [50], and LLMOpt [62],
have been proposed. LLMSteer uses only embedding models for
hint set selection, which is light, but the improvement is limited.
LLM-QO focuses primarily on applying fine-tuning to improve
the model’s performance. LLM-QO uses a DPO-based reinforce-
ment fine-tuning method, which requires constructing a dataset
of “preferred” and “non_preferred” pairs beforehand. In contrast,
our GRPO-based approach eliminates this overhead and potentially
enhances the reasoning abilities of LLMs by training in actual ex-
ecution environments. On the other hand, LLMOpt [62] employs
LLMs to replace components in the Bao [30] workflow, fine-tuning
them for plan candidate generation and selection. These works
represent initial explorations of applying LLMs to replace LQO
pipeline. However, SEFRQO adopts an LLM-native perspective to
13

=== PAGE 14 ===
Liu et al.
define optimization problems via model fine-tuning and prompt
optimization. Our self-evolving RAG design also shows continuous
learning capabilities that previous methods cannot easily achieve,
and SERAG [26] is our initial work.
9 Conclusion and Future Work
This paper proposes SEFRQO, a self-evolving RAG system for query
optimization. It leverages LLMs’ fine-tuning strategies to avoid cold
starts and enhance generalization across workloads. It introduces a
two-phase framework that combines offline SFT, Q𝐺𝑅𝑃𝑂 and online
in-context learning. SEFRQO dynamically generates prompts and
continuously evolves through execution feedback. We explore the
knowledge transfer capabilities of LLM-based query optimization
and demonstrate its potential for practical deployment. Various
experiments show that SEFRQO’s superiority over previous LQOs
and the baseline execution engine. To the best of our knowledge, this
work is the first to apply RAG to query optimization in databases,
thereby extending the frontier of this research area. Currently,
SEFRQO targets OLAP queries, as its overhead remains a challenge
for OLTP. Overcoming this limitation is left for future work.
