=== PAGE 1 ===
Preprint
TOOLCHAIN∗: EFFICIENT ACTION SPACE NAVIGATION
IN LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS WITH A∗SEARCH
Yuchen Zhuang1∗, Xiang Chen2, Tong Yu2, Saayan Mitra2
Victor Bursztyn2, Ryan A. Rossi2, Somdeb Sarkhel2, Chao Zhang1
Georgia Institute of Technology1 Adobe Research2
yczhuang@gatech.edu, {xiangche, tyu, smitra}@adobe.com
{soaresbu, ryrossi, sarkhel}@adobe.com, chaozhang@gatech.edu
ABSTRACT
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated powerful decision-making and
planning capabilities in solving complicated real-world problems. LLM-based au-
tonomous agents can interact with diverse tools (e.g., functional APIs) and generate
solution plans that execute a series of API function calls in a step-by-step manner.
The multitude of candidate API function calls significantly expands the action
space, amplifying the critical need for efficient action space navigation. However,
existing methods either struggle with unidirectional exploration in expansive ac-
tion spaces, trapped into a locally optimal solution, or suffer from exhaustively
traversing all potential actions, causing inefficient navigation. To address these
issues, we propose ToolChain∗, an efficient tree search-based planning algorithm
for LLM-based agents. It formulates the entire action space as a decision tree,
where each node represents a possible API function call involved in a solution
plan. By incorporating the A∗search algorithm with task-specific cost function
design, it efficiently prunes high-cost branches that may involve incorrect actions,
identifying the most low-cost valid path as the solution. Extensive experiments
on multiple tool-use and reasoning tasks demonstrate that ToolChain∗efficiently
balances exploration and exploitation within an expansive action space. It outper-
forms state-of-the-art baselines on planning and reasoning tasks by 3.1% and 3.5%
on average while requiring 7.35x and 2.31x less time, respectively.
1
INTRODUCTION
Large language models (LLMs), such as GPT (Radford et al., 2018; 2019; Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI,
2023) and PaLM (Chowdhery et al., 2022; Anil et al., 2023), have exhibited remarkable capabilities of
reasoning and instruction-following across a wide range of tasks (Huang & Chang, 2023). Recently,
instructing LLMs to utilize external tools for complex real-world problems has emerged as a topic of
growing importance (Hao et al., 2023b; Zhang et al., 2023; Zhuang et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023b;
Schick et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2023). For complicated tasks, LLM-based autonomous agents integrate
LLMs with various external tools (APIs), generating solutions that involve intermediate reasoning
steps (Schick et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2023; Patil et al., 2023; Qin et al., 2023b). Given a problem
description, the goal of an agent is to determine a chain of API function calls that can be executed
sequentially toward a valid solution. However, given an action space of hundreds of candidate API
functions, each comprised of various function names and parameters available at every planning step,
searching for a globally optimal solution becomes highly challenging.
Existing methods that leverage LLMs as autonomous agents for decision-making and reasoning can be
broadly classified into four categories (Figure 1): (1) open-loop methods (Wei et al., 2022; Zhou et al.,
2022; Huang et al., 2022a; Shen et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2023) generate a complete plan for problem-
solving without any adaptation during the execution; (2) greedy closed-loop methods (Yao et al.,
2023b; Jang, 2023; Huang et al., 2022b; Kim et al., 2023; Liang et al., 2022) leverage environmental
feedback to greedily determine the next step in the plan; and (3) closed-loop methods (Wang et al.,
2023; Sun et al., 2023) incorporate environment feedback to continuously monitor system behaviors
∗Work done during the author’s internship at Adobe Research.
1
arXiv:2310.13227v1  [cs.CL]  20 Oct 2023

=== PAGE 2 ===
Preprint
Open-Loop System
(e.g., Chain-of-Thoughts)
Greedy Closed-Loop System
(e.g., ReAct)
Closed-Loop System 
(e.g., AdaPlanner)
Tree Search-based System
(e.g., Tree of Thoughts)
Potential Actions
Explored Actions
Infeasible Options
Final Output
Exploration
Execution
Figure 1: A comparison of existing methods that leverage LLMs for decision-making from a searching
space perspective. Most existing methods of (1) open-loop systems (e.g., Chain-of-Thought (Wei
et al., 2022)), (2) greedy closed-loop systems (e.g., ReAct (Yao et al., 2023b)), and (3) closed-loop
systems (e.g., Adaplanner (Sun et al., 2023)) only explore one possible direction. This often leads
to limited exploration of the entire action space. In contrast, (4) tree search-based methods (e.g.,
Tree-of-Thoughts (Yao et al., 2023a)) identify a valid solution path by extensively examining multiple
decision space branches, covering almost every conceivable node. Our proposed ToolChain∗belongs
to the tree search-based category and improves by developing an efficient search algorithm.
and modify subsequent plans accordingly. However, such unidirectional navigation systems have
two major limitations: error propagation, originating from a mistaken action and leading to a faulty
loop; limited exploration, despite being equipped with plan refinement strategies, most existing
methods only explore a small portion of the large action space, falling into locally optimal solutions.
To this end, few studies initiate exploring (4) tree search-based methods (Yao et al., 2023a; Hao
et al., 2023a) for leveraging multiple reasoning paths simultaneously and evaluating branches to
decide the next course of action. However, existing tree search-based algorithms, such as depth-first
search (DFS) (Yao et al., 2023a) and Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) (Hao et al., 2023a), require
exhaustive exploration of nearly all potential actions within the entire decision space, resulting in
inefficient searches for globally optimal solutions.
To address these limitations, we propose ToolChain∗, an efficient A∗tree search-based planning
method for LLM-based agents. We formulate the tool-use planning process as a decision tree, where
each node represents a potential API call for a given step. Aligned with the traditional A∗search
algorithm, the proposed ToolChain∗determines which paths to extend based on both the cost of the
current path and an estimated future cost required for completing the current plan. With task-specific
cost functions, erroneous actions will be penalized and mitigated, as these actions cause additional
costs when propagated along the path, leading the path to be progressively de-prioritized and left
unexpanded over iterations. In addition, unlike the simulation stage in MCTS, which requires multiple
steps to simulate until a terminal state during rollout, the future cost estimation in ToolChain∗enables
expansion of only the next step. With efficient node expansion, ToolChain∗effectively searches for
globally optimal solutions within a manageable number of steps.
Our main contributions are as follows: (1) We propose ToolChain∗, a novel A∗-like tree search
algorithm, to develop autonomous LLM-based agents for complex planning and reasoning tasks; (2)
ToolChain∗formulates the action space as a decision tree, effectively mitigating error propagation and
expanding search space; and (3) ToolChain∗significantly accelerates LLM-based agents in navigating
expansive action tree spaces, striking a balance between exploring unvisited actions and exploiting
global optimal solutions.
2
PRELIMINARIES
Problem Formulation. Leveraging LLMs as agents for problem solving can be conceptualized
as a planning process. For initialization, the LLM agent is augmented with access to a pool of m
candidate API functions, denoted as A = {API0, API1, · · · , APIm}, along with a natural language
task description g ∈G from the task space G. The objective of the LLM agent is to translate the task
description g into an ordered sequence of Tg API function calls pg = {a0, a1, · · · , aTg}. Specifically,
considering the task description g as the initial state s0, we sample the plan pg by prompting the LLM
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
Preprint
agent with the API definitions I and demonstration samples D as: pg ∼ρ(a0, a1, · · · , aTg|s0; I, D) :
G × I × D →∆(ATg), where ∆(·) is a probability simplex function. The final output is derived
after executing the entire plan y ∼π(y|s0, a1, a2, · · · , aTg), where π(·) indicates a plan executor.
Tree Search-Based Systems. Tree search methods frame a planning problem as a search over a
decision tree, where each node n represents an action an, accompanied by a state sn ∈S indicating
a valid path from the initial state to the current action. When exploring the tree space, tree search
approaches expand k potential child nodes ch(n) of the current node n via sampling from the potential
action set generated by LLMs a(j)
ch(n) ∼ρ(ach(n)|sn; I, D), (j = 1, · · · , k) and add the new nodes
to the tree state space S = S ∪{(sn, a(j)
ch(n))}k
j=1. With value functions for state evaluation, tree
search-based methods aim to identify a path from the root node s0 to the leaf nodes with the highest
value or lowest cost. Our proposed ToolChain∗is a tree search-based method.
Monte Carlo Tree Search. MCTS, which employs heuristic exploration to construct its search tree,
has achieved great success in decision-making tasks, such as GO (Silver et al., 2016). Its variant,
UCT (Kocsis & Szepesv´ari, 2006), has been adopted in Hao et al. (2023a) for the development of
LLM-based agents. Specifically, it initiates from the root node of the task description g and moves
down the tree by selecting optimal actions (child nodes) until the leaf node. Then, MCTS introduces
one or multiple child nodes based on available actions provided by LLMs and identifies the most
promising node n. From the newly expanded node n, MCTS requires LLM agents to execute a
simulated rollout until a terminal state is reached. Upon completing the simulation, a result is returned
from n all the way back to the root node, accompanied by the value function Q(n) to update all the
scores on the selected path.
f(n)
g(n)
Monte Carlo Tree Search
ToolChain*
Q(n)
Q(n)
Figure 2: A comparison between MCTS and A∗
search in ToolChain∗. Unlike MCTS, A∗search
only requires one-step expansion guided by cost
functions.
MCTS vs. A∗Search. Despite the performance
gains attained by MCTS in planning and reason-
ing tasks, its direct application to LLM agents
comes with significant execution costs. The roll-
out mechanism within MCTS requires multiple
LLM calls to prompt the next actions until a
terminal state. Furthermore, unlike two-player
zero-sum games, the planning tasks essentially
operate as one-player games, where value func-
tions estimated by random rollouts might exhibit
significant inaccuracies. To mitigate the issue,
ToolChain∗is proposed based on a more effi-
cient A∗search algorithm. A comparison be-
tween MCTS and our proposed ToolChain∗is
illustrated in Figure 2. Unlike MCTS, A∗search
necessitates only a single LLM call for deter-
mining the next actions during expansion according to two cost functions, g(n), quantifying the cost
of the path from the root node to n, and h(n), a heuristic function estimating the cost of the most
promising path from n to the goal.
3
TOOLCHAIN∗: A TREE SEARCH PERSPECTIVE ON EXTERNAL TOOL USE
In this section, we introduce the ToolChain∗that enables LLM-based agents to efficiently navigate
the action space to identify a valid solution path for problem-solving (Figure 3). First, we outline
the framework of ToolChain∗(Section 3.1), consisting of three iterative stages: selecting the most
promising path in the explored decision tree, expanding the potential following actions along the
selected path, and subsequently updating the cost functions. Within ToolChain∗, the cost function is
composed of two components: cumulative cost g(n) (Section 3.2) and future score h(n) (Section 3.3).
3.1
OVERVIEW
ToolChain∗is a best-first search algorithm, efficiently guiding LLM agents in generating a sequence
of API function calls as a solution plan. We formulate the action space as a search tree T , where each
node n represents an action an, accompanied by a state composed of the initial task description s0
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
Preprint
(c) Update:
Update the value functions 
of the newly added nodes in 
the search tree.
(b) Expansion:
Expand the nodes with 
potential next steps.
(a) Selection:
Pick a frontier node with the 
lowest summation of cumulative 
cost and future cost
Figure 3: ToolChain∗framework of three phases: (a) selection, (b) expansion, and (c) update. The
dark and grey circles indicate the explored actions and the potential but unexplored ones, respectively.
The blue circles represent the selected next step.
and previous actions. This facilitates the translation of action sequence planning into a navigation
task originating from the root node of the decision tree. ToolChain∗starts the search tree T with a
single root node, corresponding to the input input problem description s0. At each step, it selects a
node n from the frontiers of T (denoted as F(T )) according to the cost function. Then, it expands n
with the LLM to generate a set of k potential i.i.d. actions {a(j)
ch(n)}k
j=1 for the next step and grows T
with the generated actions. Finally, we update the actions into new nodes s(j)
ch(n) = (sn, a(j)
ch(n)) and
update their cost functions accordingly. Algorithm 1 describes the procedure in detail.
Algorithm 1: ToolChain∗.
Input: x: input; ρ: large language model; T:
the maximum exploring steps; T : the
decision tree; F(T ): the set of frontier
nodes in T ; f(n): the cost function of
node n.
Initialize T = {V, E}, V ←x, E ←∅
for t = 1, 2, · · · , T do
nnext ←arg minn∈F(T ) f(n) // Selection
{a(i)}k
i=1 ←ρ(nnext) // Expansion
for i = 1, 2, · · · , k do
Add [nnext,a(i)] to T under nnext
Update f(n) for n in F(T ). // Update
Output: The valid path to solve the problem
arg maxn∈F(T ) f(n).
Selection. Given a search tree T , we denote its
nodes as V(T ). The frontier F(T ) ⊆V(T ) con-
tains all the leaf nodes in T that have yet to be
explored. Given our objective to minimize the total
cost of the final solution, the optimal next node to
expand would be the most promising plan as part of
the best solution. Assume we possess a cost func-
tion oracle f(n), which provides the cost of the
best plan incorporating n to address the problem s0
under T . Then, we can select the next node with
the lowest cost: nnext = arg minn∈F(T ) f(n). A
proper design of the value function f(n) not only
augments search efficiency but also aids in identi-
fying globally optimal solutions.
Expansion. Once the node n with the minimum
cost estimation f(n) has been selected, we expand
the search tree with k potential actions for the next
step. These actions are sampled from the potential
action set generated by LLMs a(j)
ch(n) ∼ρ(ach(n)|sn; I, D), (j = 1, · · · , k), given the API definitions
I and demonstration examples D. For the generated actions or reasoning steps {a(j)
ch(n)}k
j=1, we
establish their corresponding nodes under node n. Contrasting with the approach in MCTS (Hao
et al., 2023a), which requires multiple calls to ρ until a terminal state during rollout, our expansion
only requires a single call to generate the possible actions at the next step.
Update. Denote the search tree T after expansion of node n as T ′. Given that new nodes have been
incorporated and the original tree structure has changed, we need to update the frontier nodes as
F(T ′). With the new frontier nodes n ∈F(T ′), we can compute their corresponding cost functions
for the next selection-expansion-update iteration.
Cost Function. We draw inspiration from A∗algorithm to design and update the cost function
f(n). Specifically, A∗selects the path that minimizes f(n) = g(n) + h(n), where n is the current
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
Preprint
node, g(n) represents the cost of the path from the start node to n, and h(n) is a heuristic function
estimating the cost of the cheapest path from n to the goal.
3.2
DESIGN OF CUMULATIVE COST g(n)
During the planning process, we assess the cumulative cost of actions in the current plan and guide
the planning based on the assessment. For each node n in the searching tree, we design a single-step
value function gt(n) ranging from 0 to 1 and formulate the cost as its complement 1 −gt(n). Thus,
the cumulative cost of n can be computed by summing up all the single-step costs of its ancestor
nodes an(n): g(n) = P
i∈an(n) 1 −gt(i). More specifically, we combine two different value
functions, the task-specific heuristic function from reference data (long-term memory) gt,1(n) and
the self-consistency frequency by LLM gt,2(n), to compute cumulative cost g(n):
g(n) =
X
i∈{an(n),n}
(1 −gt,1(i))α · (1 −gt,2(i))1−α,
(1)
where α is a weight parameter for the geometric mean.
Task-Specific Heuristic Function gt,1(n). We can also maintain a long-term memory with successful
experiences and compute a heuristic score accordingly. The long-term memory starts from a seed set
of demonstration examples provided in a specific dataset and is iteratively extended with successful
plans during evaluation. Each example within the long-term memory is represented as a plan
mj = (sj,0, aj,1, aj,2, · · · , aj,Tj) ∈M. The number of actions Tj in the plan varies case-by-
case. To leverage the successful experiences for evaluating the current plan, we compute the
longest common sub-sequence (LCS) score between the current generated plan sn and each plan
mj in the long-term memory LCS score(sn, mj) =
LCS(sn,mj)
min(L(sn),L(mj)), where L(·) indicates the
length of the plan. Following this, we compute the cumulative functions as the highest LCS score
gt,1(n) = maxmj∈M LCS score(sn, mj), measuring the proportion of success in the plan relative
to the experiences accumulated in the long-term memory.
Self-consistency Frequency gt,2(n). Self-consistency (Wang et al., 2022b) is an ensemble approach
that samples k i.i.d. actions at the next step {a(j)
t+1}k
j=1 ∼p(at+1|x, a0, a1, · · · , at). We then select
the semantically different actions from the k generated samples as the set of potential next steps. For
tool-use scenarios, as the actions are strict in format of API functions and parameters, we directly
construct the set with non-repeating actions. For reasoning scenarios, however, actions represent
intermediate thought processes articulated in natural language. Inspired by Kuhn et al. (2022), we
apply a DeBERTa-large model (He et al., 2020) fine-tuned on natural language inference (NLI)
dataset MNLI (Williams et al., 2018) to determine whether the two generated actions entail each other
semantically. This allows us to discard actions that are semantically equivalent, only retaining those
that offer distinct reasoning as potential next steps. Lastly, we consider the frequencies of different
actions in the set as their corresponding cumulative score, given by gt,2(n) = #{j|a(j)
t+1 = n}/k.
3.3
DESIGN OF FUTURE COST h(n)
Similar to the formulation of cumulative cost g(n), we integrate two distinct reward functions, the
task-specific heuristic function ht,1(n) and the Imagination Score by LLM ht,2(n), to compute h(n):
h(n) = (1 −ht,1(n))β · (1 −ht,2(n))1−β,
(2)
where β is the geometric mean weight for future cost.
Task-Specific Heuristic Function. Similar to the heuristic function in the cumulative cost (Sec-
tion 3.2), we continue to leverage the long-term memory to compute the future score. From the
long-term memory, we can derive the average relative position score of the action a appearing in the
plans mj: ht,1(a) = P
mj∈M 1{a∈mj}
pos(a,mj)
Tj
, where pos(a, mj) indicates the relative position
of action a in the plan mj. Note that the action space can be infinite, and the long-term memory may
not cover all potential actions relevant to unseen tasks. Thus, given an action node n, we compute its
future score as the heuristic score of the lexically closest action covered in the long-term memory:
ht,1(n) = ht,1(arg maxa∈M LCS score(n, a)).
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
Preprint
Table 1: Main experiment results (success rate) on ToolBench, including tool use scenarios of (1)
Home Search, (2) Trip Booking, (3) Google Sheets, and (4) Virtual Home.
Models
GPT-3.5-turbo
GPT-4
Home
Search
Trip
Booking
Google
Sheets
Virtual
Home Average Home
Search
Trip
Booking
Google
Sheets
Virtual
Home Average
GPT (OpenAI, 2023)
80.0
85.8
51.4
18.9
59.2
97.0
96.7
62.9
23.5
70.0
ReAct (Yao et al., 2023b)
83.0
86.7
47.1
20.5
59.3
94.0
97.5
64.3
22.7
69.6
AdaPlanner (Sun et al., 2023)
90.0
87.5
55.7
20.7
63.5
97.0
97.5
66.7
27.1
72.1
ToT-DFS (Yao et al., 2023a)
82.0
81.7
53.4
21.0
59.5
95.0
96.7
62.9
24.8
69.9
ToT-BFS (T=5) (Yao et al., 2023a)
83.0
83.3
48.6
21.8
59.9
92.0
94.2
64.3
26.6
69.3
MCTS (Hao et al., 2023a)
85.0
86.7
62.9
24.4
64.8
96.0
94.2
66.7
31.3
72.1
ToolChain∗
93.0
90.8
61.4
28.6
68.5
98.0
97.5
68.6
34.5
74.7
Imagination Score by LLM. Directly querying LLMs for self-evaluation of the future cost at the
current step often yields over-confident scores (Lin et al., 2022). To address this, we enable LLMs to
imagine more concrete future steps until the target nT . However, it is worth noting that the imagined
actions may not align with the real executed actions in future plans. To this end, we compute the
future score as the proportion of current steps present in the imagined plan, i.e., the ratio of the
number between the current node n ancestors to the target node nT : ht,2(n) =
|{an(n)}|
|{an(nT )}|. A higher
score suggests that the imagined plan closely captures the path to the current step, indicating that
fewer remaining steps are needed to accomplish the task in the imagination of LLMs.
4
EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of ToolChain∗through comprehensive
experiments across a wide range of tool-use scenarios from ToolBench (Xu et al., 2023) (Section
4.2). In addition, we conduct extensive experiments on GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021) (Section 4.3) to
showcase the generalization of ToolChain∗on pure reasoning tasks without tool interaction.
4.1
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
Datasets. We evaluate ToolChain∗on four tool-use environments in ToolBench (Xu et al., 2023) and
one reasoning task in GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021). For tool-use scenarios, we select environments
with both a vast action space comprising a large number of function tools, and a requirement of a deep
solution path with multiple API functions (i.e., complicated tasks), including Home Search, Trip
Booking, Google Sheets, and Virtual Home. Given that numerical reasoning requires multi-step
computations to calculate answers, we choose GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021) for evaluation on math
reasoning. Dataset details are available in Appendix D.1.
Baselines. For environments from ToolBench, we compare ToolChain∗with the state-of-the-art
LLM planning algorithms from three main categories, including open-loop systems (GPT (OpenAI,
2023)), closed-loop systems (ReAct (Yao et al., 2023b) and Adaplanner (Sun et al., 2023)), and
tree search-based systems (Tree-of-Thoughts (Yao et al., 2023a) and MCTS (Hao et al., 2023a)).
For mathematical reasoning problems, we employ a similar set of baselines as in the tool-use
tasks. However, we exclude ReAct and AdaPlanner from mathematical reasoning evaluations.
This is because they heavily depend on high-quality environment feedback to adjust action plans,
which is unavailable in the GSM8K dataset. Additionally, since the action steps in the tool-use
scenarios inherently form coherent sequences, we limit our comparison of ToolChain∗to Chain-of-
Thought (Wei et al., 2022) and Self-Consistency (Wang et al., 2022b) only for the math reasoning
task, and exclude it from the ToolBench evaluations. Baseline details can be found in Appendix D.2.
4.2
TOOL USE: TOOLBENCH
We conduct experiments across four distinct planning tasks to assess the effectiveness and efficiency
of ToolChain∗in tool usage. The objective is to generate a sequence of API function calls to formulate
6

=== PAGE 7 ===
Preprint
a solution plan for each given task. For instance, these tasks include questions or requirements from
users, e.g., “Could you help me find train tickets to Cape Coral?”. We present the main results,
visualize the case study, analyze time-wise efficiency, and discuss ablation studies within the tool-use
scenarios as follows. We report the success rate as the evaluation metric. Detailed task setup for
ToolBench is available in Appendix B.3.
Results. Table 1 presents the main experiment results on ToolBench. Our proposed ToolChain∗
consistently outperforms across nearly all datasets, surpassing state-of-the-art baselines by mar-
gins of 3.7% and 2.5% with the base LLMs GPT-3.5-turbo and GPT-4, respectively. In com-
parison with the strongest closed-loop baseline AdaPlanner, ToolChain∗improves the average
success rate by 3.8%. This improvement is because AdaPlanner relies heavily on environmen-
tal feedback, which may not always be available in the tool-use scenarios. Without such high-
quality feedback, closed-loop methods tend to explore a restricted trajectory within the action
space, making them more susceptible to propagating errors from previous actions to future plans.
Take Shower
WalkTo(shower)
WalkTo(bedroom)
Find(soap)
TurnTo(shower)
Grab(soap)
TurnOn(shower)
ToolChain* Exploration Space
ReAct Exploration 
Space
…
ToolChain* Explored Nodes
ReAct Solution
ToolChain* Solution
Correct Answer
ToolChain* Execution
ReAct Execution
Problem Description
ToolChain* Exploration
WalkTo(bathroom)
Find(shower)
TurnTo(shower)
SwitchOn(shower)
Find(clothes)
…
…
…
Take Shower
WalkTo(bathroom)
WalkTo(shower)
Find(shower)
TurnTo(shower)
…
Figure 4:
Case study of ToolChain∗and Re-
Act (Yao et al., 2023b) on Virtual Home dataset.
Compared to ReAct with a unidirectional search
(red), ToolChain∗effectively enlarges search space
(blue) with tree structures.
Moreover, ToolChain∗not only surpasses the
strongest tree search-based method, MCTS, but
also shows the ability to exploit a better solution
plan within the same exploration budgets. This
is because our proposed task-specific cost func-
tion allows ToolChain∗to prioritize the expan-
sion of the most promising branches. Additional
analysis is available in Appendix D.3.
Case Study.
Figure 4 depicts an example
of ToolChain∗(GPT-4) and ReAct (Yao et al.,
2023b) on a “take shower” task in Virtual Home
dataset. According to the ground truth (green,
“shower”), ToolChain∗generates the correct ac-
tion plan (blue, “shower”) with an expanded
search space, whereas the baseline searching
method gets trapped in a locally optimal solu-
tion (red, “soap”). This suggests that by for-
mulating and expanding upon a tree-based ac-
tion space, ToolChain∗is capable of effectively
searching for the globally optimal solution in
complex multi-step planning tasks.
Table 2: Ablation studies on ToolBench.
Home
Search
Trip
Booking
Google
Sheets
Virtual
Home Average
ToolChain*
93.0
90.8
61.4
28.6
68.5
−g1,t(n)
91.0
88.3
60.0
22.6
65.5
−g2,t(n)
84.0
83.3
54.3
25.3
61.7
−h1,t(n)
88.0
87.5
61.4
23.0
65.0
−h2,t(n)
85.0
85.8
51.4
24.9
61.8
−g(n)
61.0
34.9
44.2
21.0
40.3
−h(n)
84.0
85.8
53.4
26.1
62.3
Efficiency Evaluation. In terms of efficiency,
we evaluate the running time of ToolChain∗
against all the baselines based on GPT-3.5-
turbo, as depicted in Figure 5(a).
Remark-
ably, ToolChain∗is 37.2% faster than the most
efficient tree search-based method, Tree-of-
Thoughts (BFS). This efficiency gain may stem
from the proposed superior cost function, which
efficiently navigates the most promising paths.
Additionally, ToolChain∗outpaces the best-
performing tree search-based method, MCTS,
by an impressive 415.84%. This discrepancy
arises because ToolChain∗focuses on expanding only the immediate next action during exploration.
In contrast, MCTS goes through a more exhaustive process, simulating the entire future plan step by
step using a rollout mechanism. Efficiency results based on GPT-4 are available in Appendix D.5.
Ablation Studies. We conduct ablation studies to evaluate the effectiveness (success rate) of both
the cumulative and future cost functions (Table 2). The results suggest that each component of the
cumulative and future cost functions contributes to the performance of ToolChain∗. This verifies the
efficacy of our proposed cost functions in guiding the search through the decision tree. In addition,
eliminating either the entire cumulative or future cost results in a marked decline in the success rate.
Relying exclusively on the future cost results in a sharp performance drop of 28.2%, deteriorating
ToolChain∗to a greedy strategy that favors the shortest solution plans with the least number of actions.
Conversely, if the search is guided only by the cumulative cost, ToolChain∗essentially mirrors the
7

=== PAGE 8 ===
Preprint
behavior of the BFS algorithm, yielding similar performance. Further ablation study analysis can be
found in Appendix D.6.
4.3
MATH REASONING: GSM8K
Beyond tool-use scenarios, we demonstrate the flexibility of ToolChain∗by generalizing its appli-
cation to mathematical reasoning for solving math word problems. We conduct experiments on the
entire set of GSM8K and also a subset of hard questions from GSM8K collected in ToolQA (Zhuang
et al., 2023). Detailed task setup for GSM8K is available in Appendix B.4.
Table 3: Main results on math reasoning task in
GSM8K and its hard subset collected in ToolQA.
Models
GPT-3.5-turbo
GPT-4
GSM8K ToolQA GSM8K ToolQA
GPT
67.3
26.0
86.6
66.0
CoT
70.1
30.0
87.5
75.0
Self-Consistency
76.1
47.0
92.4
78.0
ToT-DFS
69.9
32.0
89.2
76.0
ToT-BFS
72.3
39.0
91.3
77.0
MCTS
74.7
27.0
91.0
74.0
ToolChain*
77.0
52.0
93.5
84.0
Results.
Table 3 presents the main experi-
mental results (accuracy) for GSM8K and its
challenging subset from ToolQA. Similar to
tool-use studies (Table 1), ToolChain∗consis-
tently outperforms all baselines in both the orig-
inal set and the challenging subset. These re-
sults demonstrate the flexibility and generaliza-
tion capabilities of ToolChain∗in mathematical
reasoning tasks. Notably, ToolChain∗demon-
strates greater advantages over other baselines
on ToolQA (hard questions) than on GSM8K,
indicating its superior capability in solving com-
plicated tasks. This is because simpler questions
are composed of simple and static reasoning,
eliminating the need for multiple branches. In
contrast, challenging questions often involve complex reasoning, numerous intermediate steps, and
multiple solution paths. The superior performance on hard subsets emphasizes the capability of
ToolChain∗in solving complicated reasoning problems. Furthermore, the efficiency analysis pre-
sented in Figure 5(b) indicates that ToolChain∗ranks among the most efficient tree-based search
baselines and has a time efficiency comparable to closed-loop systems without a tree structure.
Detailed case studies of action space exploration and efficiency analysis with the number of valid
actions are available in Appendix D.4 and D.5, respectively.
4.4
DISCUSSION: EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS
From the comprehensive evaluations in planning and reasoning tasks presented in Sections
4.2 and 4.3, we validate that ToolChain∗addresses the two core limitations of open-/closed-
loop LLM-based agents, error propagation in multi-step solutions and constrained exploration
in expansive action spaces.
Meanwhile, we demonstrate ToolChain∗a more efficient search-
ing strategy compared to existing tree search-based agents.
From the scaling-up analysis in
Figure 10 in Appendix D.5, alongside experimental results in Table 1 and efficiency met-
rics in Figure 5, we identify a crucial trade-off between effectiveness and efficiency in
the direct application of tree search-based reasoning methods to complex tool use scenarios.
GPT
AdaPlanner ReAct ToolChain*ToT-BFS
ToT-DFS
MCTS
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Running Time (in Sec)
Home Search
Trip Booking
Google Sheet
Virtual Home
(a) ToolBench.
GPT
CoT
SC
ToolChain* ToT-BFS
ToT-DFS
MCTS
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Running Time (in Sec)
GSM8K (GPT3.5)
ToolQA (GPT3.5)
GSM8K (GPT4)
ToolQA (GPT4)
(b) GSM8K.
Figure 5: Time efficiency evaluation on (a) ToolBench and (b) GSM8K. We report the average
running time in seconds over all instances in the dataset. ToolChain∗achieves competitive efficiency
to closed-loop systems without a tree structure and outpaces other tree search-based algorithms.
8

=== PAGE 9 ===
Preprint
5
10
15
20
25
30
Step Limit
0
20
40
60
80
Success Rate (%)
(a) Performance
5
10
15
20
25
30
Step Limit
50
100
150
200
250
300
Running Time (in Sec)
Home Search
Trip Booking
Google Sheet
Virtual Home
GSM8K
(b) Running Time
Figure 6: Scaling analysis of ToolChain∗. (a) Per-
formance and (b) running time on ToolBench and
GSM8K when scaling up step limitations T.
To validate ToolChain∗in solving these issues,
we summarize key findings from experiments
as follows: (1) From the main experimental
results shown in Tables 1 and 3, ToolChain∗
surpasses open-/closed-loop and tree search
baselines in complex multi-step planning and
reasoning tasks, effectively mitigating error
propagation. A visualization example of how
ToolChain∗gradually abandons the faulty path
and mitigates error propagation is available in
Figure 7 in Appendix D.4. (2) From case studies
in Figures 4, 7, and 8, ToolChain∗navigates the
path toward an optimal solution by formulating
the action space as a decision tree, thereby extensively broadening the exploration space. (3)
From Figures 5 and 9, ToolChain∗significantly accelerates the search process compared to other tree
search-based methods, achieving time efficiency even comparable to closed-loop systems without a
tree structure. (4) From tool-use in ToolBench to math problems in GSM8K, we show that ToolChain∗
is a plug-and-play generalizable framework applicable to a wide range of planning and reasoning
problems. Notably, it exhibits exceptional proficiency in solving more challenging tasks, like ToolQA,
compared to baselines. Additional results in Appendix E and F show that ToolChain∗can generalize
to a wide range of complex reasoning tasks and open-source LLMs (e.g., LLaMA 2 (Touvron et al.,
2023)). (5) There is a trade-off between search depth (i.e., limitations on the number of steps) and
the quality of the solution path (Figure 6). ToolChain∗efficiently searches optimal solutions within
limited steps, striking a balance between exploration and exploitation.
5
RELATED WORKS
LLMs for Tool Use. Recent advances have leveraged LLMs as autonomous agents to master
tools and generate solution plans for complicated problems (Qin et al., 2023a;b; Mialon et al.,
2023). Interacting with various tools, LLM agents can augment themselves with real-time factual
knowledge (Nakano et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2023a), multi-modality understanding (Shen et al.,
2023; Lu et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023c), computational abilities (Schick et al., 2023; Parisi
et al., 2022), code interpretabilities (Gao et al., 2022; Paranjape et al., 2023), and domain-specific
functionalities (Zhang, 2023; Jin et al., 2023). However, many existing methods either concentrate on
individual tool-use scenarios (Schick et al., 2023; Parisi et al., 2022) or simply inject human-made
heuristic ordering rules for multi-tool utilization (Shen et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2023). With the
increasing number of potential API functions at each step and the escalating sequence of actions
for complex problem solutions, the action space expands exponentially, thereby diminishing their
effectiveness. ToolChain∗frames the planning challenge across various tools as navigation through
the action space to efficiently identify a valid solution path.
LLMs with Search Algorithms. The majority of LLM-based agents with open- or closed-loop
systems rely on linear reasoning or planning structure. To explore multiple branches in the action
space, self-consistency (Wang et al., 2022b) samples multiple chains of thoughts, which can be
considered as multiple i.i.d. solution paths in the decision space, selecting the best answer through
majority voting. Maieutic prompting (Jung et al., 2022) generates a tree of explanations, enforcing
logical consistency. Xie et al. (2023) adopts beam search to decode and improve Chain-of-Thoughts
reasoning chain. CoRe (Zhu et al., 2023) proposes to fine-tune both the reasoning step generator
and verifier to solve math word problems, incorporating MCTS for reasoning decoding. Tree-of-
Thoughts (Yao et al., 2023a) utilizes heuristic approaches, including depth- and breadth-first search
to identify better reasoning pathways. Additionally, RAP (Hao et al., 2023a) combines a world model
with rewards within an advanced MCTS search approach. However, many search-guided planning
approaches face the trade-off between efficient exploration of an expansive action space against the
effective exploitation of global optimal solutions. To avoid exhaustive exploration like MCTS, we
propose ToolChain∗to combine efficient A∗search with the effective reasoning ability of LLMs.
9

=== PAGE 10 ===
Preprint
6
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose ToolChain∗, an A∗tree search-based planning algorithm to augment LLMs
with external tools for complicated real-world planning and reasoning tasks. Compared to existing
open- or closed-loop LLM agents, ToolChain∗formulates the action space as a decision tree, thereby
effectively mitigating error propagation and extensively expanding the search space. Furthermore,
ToolChain∗significantly accelerates the search process compared to other tree search-based methods,
enabling tree search in complicated action space and striking a dynamic balance between exploration
and exploitation. We demonstrate ToolChain∗as a generalizable framework in a wide range of
planning and reasoning tasks with both closed- and open-source LLMs. By achieving significant
improvements over state-of-the-art baselines, ToolChain∗showcases its potential as an efficient
planning algorithm, navigating LLM-based agents in addressing complex real-world challenges.
