=== PAGE 1 ===
arXiv:2506.05853v2  [cs.DB]  7 Jul 2025
Training-Free Query Optimization via LLM-Based
Plan Similarity
Nikita Vasilenko1*, Alexander Demin 1 and Vladimir Boorlakov 2
1Ershov Institute of Informatics Systems, Novosibirsk, Russia.
2Novosibirsk State Technical University, Novosibirsk, Russia.
*Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s):
vasilenko.nikita.research@gmail.com;
Contributing authors: alexandredemin@yandex.ru;
vladimir.boorlakov@gmail.com;
Abstract
Large language model (LLM) embeddings offer a promising new avenue for
database query optimization. In this paper, we explore how pre-trained exe-
cution plan embeddings can guide SQL query execution without the need for
additional model training. We introduce LLM-PM (LLM-based Plan Mapping),
a framework that embeds the default execution plan of a query, finds its k
nearest neighbors among previously executed plans, and recommends database
hintsets based on neighborhood voting. A lightweight consistency check val-
idates the selected hint, while a fallback mechanism searches the full hint
space when needed. Evaluated on the JOB-CEB benchmark using OpenGauss,
LLM-PM achieves an average speed-up of 21% query latency reduction. This
work highlights the potential of LLM-powered embeddings to deliver practical
improvements in query performance and opens new directions for training-free,
embedding-based optimizer guidance systems.
Keywords: Query Optimization, LLM for Databases, Database Hints
1 Introduction
Query optimization is a core problem in relational database systems: the optimizer
must construct an efficient execution plan for each SQL query from a vast search
space of alternatives (potential join orders, join algorithms, table access methods,
1

=== PAGE 2 ===
etc.). Decades of research have produced sophisticated cost-based optimizers, yet they
remain imperfect and can still choose suboptimal plans that dramatically slow down
query execution. A primary cause are inaccurate cardinality estimation and cost model
which often relies on simplistic assumptions and thus can be wildly wrong. These
mistakes lead to poor plan choices (e.g., using a nested-loop join where a hash join
would be far faster).
Modern database systems offer optimizer hints as a mechanism to influence or
override plan choices. Hints are directives embedded in the SQL that guide the opti-
mizer to consider specific strategies, such as using a particular join order, favoring a
hash join over other join types, or using an index on a given table. In principle, a
skilled DBA can use hints to steer the optimizer away from known bad decisions and
toward a better plan. For example, a hint could force the use of a previously ignored
index, or constrain the join order to avoid inefficient joins. The challenge, however, is
that selecting the right hints is extremely complex – it requires a deep understanding
of the query, the data, and the optimizer’s internal heuristics. An incorrect hint may
even backfire and degrade performance rather than improve it.
These difficulties have sparked interest in automating query optimization with
machine learning. A recent trend is to treat the optimizer as a black box and use
learning methods to assist it by suggesting hints or plan tweaks that lead to faster
executions. This avoids wholesale replacement of the optimizer, focusing instead on
guiding it toward better decisions. Recent studies have shown that Large Language
Models (LLMs) can significantly enhance database query optimization. These models
are increasingly employed in various ways, such as generating execution plans, embed-
ding queries to understand their semantics, and providing optimization hints. The
promising results from these approaches indicate that LLMs are becoming a valuable
tool in the field. Given this progress, we believe that further exploration into LLM-
driven query optimization is a worthwhile endeavor, with the potential to advance the
efficiency and adaptability of database systems. However, despite these encouraging
advances, LLM-based techniques remain far from being practical for real-world deploy-
ment due to the high cost and latency of inference, which limits their applicability in
time-sensitive or resource-constrained environments.
In this paper, we introduce a straightforward method that leverages Large Lan-
guage Model (LLM) embeddings of execution plans—not the queries themselves—to
identify optimal sets of optimizer hints. Our approach combines the representational
power of LLM embeddings with a simple, fast, analogy-based prediction system that
requires no training.We aim to bridge the gap between the expressive power of LLMs
and the need for rapid, efficient query optimization systems. Our method effectively
learns from past experiences without requiring an extensive training phase—the heavy
lifting is done by the pre-trained LLM, which provides a semantic representation of
execution plans.
To validate this approach, we built a prototype on the openGauss database system
and evaluated it on one standard benchmark: JOB-CEB (3133 query instances derived
from 16 query templates on the IMDB dataset). In our experiments, the LLM-based
method successfully guided the optimizer toward faster plans for a large portion of
the queries. The results demonstrate that using LLM embeddings for plan hinting
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
can consistently outperform the default optimizer, even without relying on complex
training or modifications to the underlying system.
In summary, this paper makes the following contributions: (1) We introduce a
method for query optimization that uses LLM-generated execution plan embeddings
to enhance optimizer hint selection. (2) We propose a lightweight, fast optimization
approach that leverages pre-trained LLMs to guide the database optimizer toward bet-
ter execution plans without requiring extensive training or system modifications. (3)
We demonstrate the effectiveness of LLM-PM through experiments on standard bench-
mark (JOB-CEB), showing that LLM-based plan hinting can outperform the default
optimizer. (4) We highlight the potential of LLM embeddings to improve query per-
formance, offering a promising direction for efficient, LLM-driven query optimization
systems.
2 Related Work
Recent research into improving the quality of query optimization can be broadly
divided into two main directions. The first is aimed at completely replacing the tradi-
tional cost-based optimizer with learned models that generate query execution plans
from scratch. The second, more incremental direction seeks to augment or guide
the existing optimizer using machine learning techniques by refining cost estimates,
improving cardinality predictions, or introducing optimizer hints.
Optimizers that Replace the Traditional Optimizer
A first research line seeks to replace the entire cost–based optimizer with a
learned model that decides the execution plan end-to-end.
Neo [1] pioneered this direction: a tree-convolution network predicts the latency
of a candidate plan and a search component selects the plan with the lowest predicted
latency. This approach demonstrated the feasibility of end-to-end learned planning
but required a long training time and extensive labeled data. Deep-learning cardi-
nality models can also partially replace core optimizer logic: the MSCN model in
Learned cardinalities: Estimating correlated joins with deep learning [2]
and its follow-up Cardinality Estimation with Local Deep Learning Models
[3] learn complex data correlations that traditional histograms miss, yielding better
plans when integrated.
These works demonstrate that partial or even full replacement of an optimizer is
technically feasible, yet they come with significant trade-offs: (i) they require very
large training sets; (ii) they discard decades of handcrafted heuristics embodied in
mature optimizers; and (iii) they raise open questions about how well the learned
models generalize to unseen data distributions, schemas, and query workloads.
Optimizers that Guide the Traditional Optimizer
A second, more pragmatic line keeps the native optimizer but steers it with learned
signals such as cost and cardinality corrections or optimizer hints.
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
AQO [4] is a PostgreSQL extension that rewrites only the cardinality-estimation
component of the native optimizer. After each query execution, AQO stores the
observed cardinalities for every plan node in a per-query “memory” and trains a
k-nearest-neighbour regressor in the feature space. When the same query template re-
appears, the learned estimates are injected in place of the built-in formulas, letting the
standard search procedure pick a (usually much cheaper) plan. Three modes ( learn,
use, intelligent) allow DBAs to trade warm-up time for safety. Downsides are the
need for several training executions, extra shared-memory to hold the statistics, and
instability in case of data shift.
ACM [5] tackles a complementary problem: out-of-date cost parameters .
Implemented inside openGauss, ACM monitors each query’s buffer-hit ratio
and per-operator CPU times, then uses lightweight linear regression plus
exponential smoothing to continuously retune five key constants of the cost
model (seq page cost, random page cost, cpu tuple cost, cpu operator cost and
cpu index tuple cost). This online calibration increases the cost–time correlation
for plan nodes and cuts the end-to-end runtime all without any calibration workload
or changes to the search space. Because ACM leaves cardinality estimation untouched,
it cannot help when the dominant error source is row-count misestimation; nonethe-
less it offers a low-overhead, DBMS-internal way to keep the cost model in sync with
changing hardware and cache conditions.
BAO [6] frames hint selection as a contextual bandit. The approach uses rein-
forcement learning to iteratively steer PostgreSQL’s optimizer via a learned hints. Bao
continuously learns from running queries, treating the optimizer’s plan choices as a
bandit problem to gradually bias it toward better decisions. It achieved substantial
speedups over PostgreSQL on benchmark workloads. While powerful such approach
tailored to a specific DBMS, instance and data distribution.
To reduce integration effort and generalize across systems, hybrid learned opti-
mizers have been proposed. Anneser et al. (VLDB 2023) present AutoSteer [7],
which extends Bao’s framework with automated hint-set discovery and a plug-and-play
design that works on multiple SQL engines. AutoSteer treats the optimizer’s tunable
“knobs” (e.g., enabling/disabling certain plan rules via hints) as actions and learns
which hint combinations to apply for each query to improve performance, without
requiring expert-defined hint sets.
F ASTgres[8] formulates hint recommendation as a classification task: given a
SQL query as input, output a combination of hints (e.g., enable/disable specific join
algorithms) that will likely reduce its execution time. Under the hood, FASTgres
partitions the query workload into contexts (groups of queries with similar structure)
and trains a separate model per context to map query features to hint decisions. The
predicted hint set is then applied, and the query runs on the unmodified optimizer.
This design treats the optimizer as a black box, and FASTgres effectively learns a
function f : SQL query → hints that optimizes performance. A key challenge for such
approaches is reliability: ensuring the ML never recommends a harmful hint. FASTgres
addresses this by retraining on any query where a predicted hint caused a slowdown
(a form of feedback loop).
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
COOOL [9] casts hint choice as a learning-to-rank problem, ordering candidate
hinted plans rather than predicting absolute cost. Lero [10] also adopts a pair-wise
ranking view: a binary classifier learns which of two plans will be faster, avoiding the
need for a calibrated cost model, leveraging the native optimizer to generate candi-
date plans and using actual execution feedback to label them. By focusing on pairwise
choices, Lero avoids the difficulty of exact cost modeling and instead learns to consis-
tently pick better plans. Finally, HERO [11] addresses the key challenges in learned
hint-based query optimization: reliability, efficiency, and fast inference. Instead of a
single neural network, HERO employs an ensemble of context-aware models—each spe-
cialized for queries with the same default plan—and organizes them in a graph-based
storage of past plans and their performance under various hints. This design ensures
interpretable and reliable predictions by avoiding suggestions in unfamiliar contexts.
To overcome the exponential search space, HERO uses a parameterized local search
algorithm that balances between training cost and optimization quality, enabling rapid
convergence to effective hint sets without requiring exhaustive enumeration.
These approaches preserve the DBMS’s tried-and-tested search space and heuristics
while adding a learned “advisor” layer, typically with far lower engineering overhead
than wholesale replacement.
Large Language Models (LLMs) for Query-Plan Optimization
Recent research has begun to explore whether the rich prior knowledge encoded
in foundation models—such as large language models (LLMs)—can be leveraged to
improve query optimization.
Tan et al. (VLDB 2025) proposeLLM-QO [12], an optimizer that uses a generative
LLM to produce query plans in a textual form. Authors fine-tune a general-purpose
LLM with a huge training set of queries and plans (using a technique called QInstruct
to serialize database metadata, SQL, and plans into text). LLM-QO treats query
optimization as a text generation problem: given the query (and some DB metadata)
as input, the LLM directly writes out an execution plan step by step. This is an
extreme end-to-end use of an LLM, essentially replacing the optimizer’s search process
with the LLM’s learned knowledge. While this is an exciting and novel direction that
showcases the potential of LLMs for direct plan generation, we believe the approach is
still far from practical deployment. More extensive studies are needed to convincingly
demonstrate that LLMs can consistently produce high-quality execution plans across
diverse workloads and schemas. Additionally, the computational cost and latency of
generating plans using large language models currently remain significantly higher
than those of traditional optimizers, limiting their real-world applicability.
An alternative direction, closer to our work, is using LLMs for plan tuning rather
than full plan generation. LLMSteer [13] is an approach that keeps the existing
optimizer but uses an LLM to assist in picking hints. They embed each query’s text
using a pre-trained LLM (specifically, they obtain a fixed-size vector embedding of the
SQL query), and then train a simple classifier on a small labeled dataset to decide how
to steer the optimizer. In their prototype, the task was to choose between two possible
plan options for each query (e.g., with or without a particular index or join hint), and
the classifier learned to predict which option would be faster. Despite the simplicity of
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
this approach (no complex feature engineering, just raw LLM embeddings as input),
it managed to outperform PostgreSQL’s built-in optimizer on the evaluated queries.
In the work LLM-R2 [14], query rewriting is used as an optimization method.
This approach solves a similar query optimization task using a language model, but
the method differs. The language model is prompted with previously optimized queries
and their rewrite rules and tasked with providing recommended rewrite rules for new
queries. However, LLM-R2 can only compose rules that Calcite already knows; it
cannot invent semantics-preserving rewrites outside that catalogue.
Position of Our Work.
Our goal is not to chase state-of-the-art speed-ups at any cost. Instead, we aim to
demonstrate both the practical value of execution plan embeddings and the feasibility
of building a simple, robust system around them—a system that can realistically
be used in practice. LLM-PM is deliberately lightweight and training-free: we use a
pre-trained LLM to embed query plans and apply a simple nearest-neighbour search
to transfer hint sets. Despite its simplicity, this approach proves to be surprisingly
effective—plan embeddings alone can match or even surpass the quality of handcrafted
plan encodings, while requiring far less engineering effort.
Crucially, our method avoids the complexity and computational overhead of gen-
erative LLM-based approaches. Using only plan embeddings extracted from a frozen
LLM is both significantly cheaper and faster than generating plans or rewrite rules
with an LLM, making it a far more practical solution for real-world deployment. The
nearest-neighbour search component is not only efficient but also robust and transpar-
ent—a training-free, plug-and-play mechanism that can easily adapt to new workloads,
schemas, and data distributions.
In short, we view our contribution as evidence that ”off-the-shelf” plan embeddings,
combined with simple retrieval-based methods, offer a practical and low-overhead
alternative to both traditional optimizers and complex learned pipelines—not as a bid
for theoretical peak performance, but as a step toward real-world usability.
3 LLM-PM
This chapter presents LLM-PM, a two-part framework for automatic hint selection
based on LLM plan embeddings. It combines our proposed plan-mapping algorithm,
which transfers hint sets from similar plans in embedding space, with an adaptive
search procedure that exhaustively explores the hint space to identify optimal con-
figurations. While the search algorithm itself is not novel, we include it as a fallback
mechanism to ensure completeness and make the overall system self-contained.
3.1 Problem formulation
We formalize the task of automatic hint selection for query optimization as follows.
Let Q be a SQL query submitted to the database. The database’s query optimizer
can produce an execution plan P for Q, which results in some cost C(Q, P). In the
default case (with no hints), the optimizer chooses a plan Pdefault based on its built-
in heuristics and cost estimates, yielding execution time T (Q, Pdefault). Our goal is to
6

=== PAGE 7 ===
find a set of hints (hintset) H for query Q such that when the optimizer is guided
by H (and thus may choose a different plan PH), the execution time is minimized.
Formally, we seek:
H ∗(Q) = arg min
H∈H(Q)
T (Q, P H) (1)
where H(Q) denotes the space of all valid hint configurations for query Q. In other
words, H ∗(Q) is the optimal hint set that yields the lowest latency for Q. This is akin
to the definition of steering an optimizer: selecting a hint or set of hints that leads to
the fastest plan for the query. In practice, H(Q) can be very large.
3.2 Hints
Exhaustively testing every hint combination quickly becomes infeasible, so we
accelerate the search with two techniques.
Timeout threshold (fastest-so-far).
After each plan execution we update a variable Tmin ← min
 
Tmin, T (Q, P)

(initially
Tmin = T (Q, Pdefault)). If any subsequent hinted plan exceeds the current Tmin, we
abort its execution and mark the associated hint set as sub-optimal. This prunes
expensive plans early.
Plan caching.
Each distinct physical plan is cached together with its measured latency. When the
optimizer produces a plan already in the cache, we reuse the stored latency instead
of executing the plan again. This is most effective when many hints have little or no
impact on the chosen plan.
The seven binary hints under consideration are:
• enable nestloop
• enable hashjoin
• enable mergejoin
• enable seqscan
• enable indexscan
• enable indexonlyscan
• enable bitmapscan
Tie-breaking Among Equivalent Hint Sets.
Occasionally the same physical plan P can be generated by more than one hint
configuration. For instance,
H1 = (0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1), H 2 = (0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1, 0),
produce an identical plan even though they differ only in the final flag
(enable bitmapscan). Here, the i-th bit denotes the i-th Boolean knob listed earlier;
a value of 1 disables the operator, whereas 0 keeps its default, enabled state. To select
7

=== PAGE 8 ===
a unique “canonical” hint set we choose the configuration that disables the fewest
operators:
bH(P ) = arg min
H:PH=P
7X
i=1
hi.
In the example above, H2 is preferred because it disables one knob fewer than H1.
This rule is motivated by two considerations. (i) If a plan can be produced whether a
knob is on or off, that knob appears to have no influence on the plan’s efficiency, so
leaving it enabled avoids unnecessary restrictions. (ii) Turning off additional operators
compresses the optimizer’s search space and may cause poor performance on queries or
data distributions that differ from the training workload. Selecting the most permissive
hint set therefore preserves as much of the optimizer’s built-in expertise as possible
while still steering it toward the desired plan.
Adaptive hint search.
Algorithm 1 scans the entire space of 128 binary hint sets in a single pass while
continually tightening an execution-time threshold. The query is first executed with all
operators enabled to establish an initial timeout Tmin and seed the plan–latency cache
C. The remaining configurations are then dispatched across w = 8 worker threads. For
each hint set the optimizer produces a physical plan; if the same plan has already been
observed, its latency is retrieved from C without re-execution. Otherwise the query is
executed under the current timeout Tmin. Plans that exceed the timeout are aborted
early and the corresponding hint sets are labelled sub-optimal. Whenever a faster
execution finishes, Tmin is atomically updated, immediately tightening the timeout
for all workers still in flight. Because slow plans are terminated quickly and repeated
plans are short-circuited via the cache, the procedure spends most of its effort on a
small number of promising configurations while still guaranteeing full coverage of the
hint space.
8

=== PAGE 9 ===
Algorithm 1 Adaptive Hint Search with Timeout Pruning and Plan Cache
Input: Query Q; full catalogue of binary hint sets H = {H1, . . . , H128}; worker count
w ← 8
Output: runtime threshold Tmin; plan–latency cache C
1: Tmin ← execute(Q, default)
2: C ←
 
plan(Q, default), T min
	
3: for all H ∈ H \ {default} in parallel on w threads do
4: P ← plan(Q, H)
5: if P ∈ C then
6: t ← C[P ]
7: else
8: t ← execute(Q, H, timeout = Tmin)
9: if t = Timeout then
10: mark H as sub-optimal
11: continue
12: end if
13: C[P ] ← t
14: end if
15: Tmin ← min
 
Tmin, t

▷ atomic update
16: end for
17: return (Tmin, C)
3.3 Plan-Mapping Algorithm
This section will describe the principle of plan mapping and its motivation and how
a new query plan receives hints from the existing embedding space. Based on the
assumption that embeddings from an LLM can provide a good representation of a
query plan, we can attempt to build a system that assigns the same hint set to similar
plans. To achieve this, it is necessary to define a distance metric between plans, where
plans within a certain distance from each other would be assigned the same hint set.
When planning a query with a new hint, a new, potentially faster plan emerges.
It would be useful to also consider this new plan in the system. Following this idea,
a second embedding for the potentially faster plan can be created and compared
with the optimized plan resulting from applying the hint in the embedding store. In
this way, the assignment of hints will undergo a two-step verification process: first,
comparing the default plans and searching for a hint candidate, and second, evaluating
the modified plan.
The goal is to decide, for a new plan P0 (obtained for the incoming query Q with
all hints enabled), whether there exists a nearby plan in the embedding space whose
associated hint set is likely to improve Q. We operate in the space of plan embeddings
produced by a pre-trained LLM; the word “plan” below always refers to its embedding.
From the offline search described in §3.2 we store triples ( di, H ⋆
i , oi), where di
is the embedding of the i-th default plan, H ⋆
i is its optimal hint set, and oi is the
9

=== PAGE 10 ===
embedding of the corresponding optimised plan. If no hint set speeds up the query,
then H ⋆
i is the all-enabled vector and oi = di.
Key intuition.
Plans that are close in embedding space tend to share physical structure; therefore
the same hint set often remains beneficial within a local neighbourhood. We leverage
this locality in two stages:
1. Neighbourhood voting. Among the N nearest default plans, select the most
popular non-default hint set. This rests on the assumption that structurally similar
plans tend to share the same inefficiencies—so applying the hint that worked for
those neighbors is likely to optimize the new plan in a similar way.
2. Consistency check. Re-plan the query with the chosen candidate hint set and
for both the default plan and the candidate-hint plan we gather their K nearest
neighbors (all of which have known execution times), compute the average runtime
in each neighborhood, and compare them. If the candidate-plan neighborhood’s
average runtime is smaller than the default-plan neighborhood’s, we adopt the new
hint set; otherwise, we keep the original.
This two-stage test balances coverage and safety: the N nearest neighbours let us
compile a list of locally popular hint sets and select the most frequent one as the
candidate, while the consistency check with K prevents us from blindly applying a
hint that would push the optimizer to sub-optimal space.
Plan space
N K
p
p0
h(p)
h(p0)
pi
pj
pk
hi(pi)
hj(pj)
hk(pk)
Fig. 1 : Two-stage hint selection: vote among the N nearest default-plan neighbours
to choose a candidate hint, then verify its benefit via the K-nearest optimized-plan
neighbourhood.
Detailed description.
Let ϕ(·) be the LLM encoder mapping a query plan to a d-dimensional vector. In
Figure 1, the left circle shows the embedding of the default plan P0 as point p0,
10

=== PAGE 11 ===
together with its N nearest neighbours (semi-transparent blue). We vote among those
neighbours’ hint sets to pick the candidate hint Hcand. On the right, we show the
embedding of the re-planned query Pcand as h(p0) and its K nearest neighbours. By
comparing the average runtimes in these twoK-neighbourhoods—one around p (using
default runtimes) and one aroundpnew (using optimized runtimes)—we decide whether
Hcand genuinely improves performance. This two-stage check maximizes hint coverage
(via the first N-neighborhood vote) while guarding against harmful suggestions (via
the second K-neighborhood consistency test).
1. Embed the default plan. Compute
p0 = ϕ(P0),
where P0 is the optimizer’s default plan for query Q.
2. Neighbourhood voting. Find the N nearest neighbours of p0:
N =

(di, H⋆
i , ti) | i ∈ top-N closest to p0
	
,
where each neighbour carries its hint set H ⋆
i and known runtime ti. Build a
frequency table over non-default {H ⋆
i } and choose the most frequent as Hcand,
breaking ties by smallest distance ∥p0 − di∥.
3. Embed the candidate plan. Apply Hcand to Q, let the resulting plan be Pcand,
and compute
pcand = ϕ(Pcand).
4. Consistency check via two K–neighborhoods.
• Let
K0 = {d0,1, . . . ,d0,K} and Kcand = {dcand,1, . . . ,dcand,K}
be the K nearest neighbours of p0 and pcand, respectively.
• Retrieve their known runtimes {t0,1, . . . , t0,K} and {tcand,1, . . . , tcand,K}.
• Compute the average runtimes
¯t0 = 1
K
KX
j=1
t0,j, ¯tcand = 1
K
KX
j=1
tcand,j.
• Accept Hcand if ¯tcand < ¯t0; otherwise, reject it (i.e. keep the default plan).
Hyper-parameters.
The algorithm has three knobs:
• N – neighbourhood size for the voting stage ( N =16 in our experiments);
• K – consistency check via two K–neighborhoods; small K favours closest plans,
large K increases coverage and stability ( K =16 also in our experiments);
• distance metric (euclidean by default).
11

=== PAGE 12 ===
Algorithm 2 Plan-Mapping Algorithm with Two-Neighborhood Consistency
Input: new query Q; reference set T = {(di, H ∗
i , oi, t def
i , t opt
i )}M
i=1; parameters N (voting-neighbours), K
(consistency-neighbours)
Output: hint set Hout or ∅
1: P0 ← plan
 
Q, default hints

2: p0 ← ϕ(P0)
3: N ← the N nearest {di} to p0
4: Hcand ← mode

H ∗
i | H ∗
i ̸= 0, (di, . . . ) ∈ N
	
5: if Hcand is undefined then
6: return ∅
7: end if
8: Pcand ← plan(Q, Hcand)
9: pcand ← ϕ(Pcand)
10: K0 ← the K nearest {di} to p0
11: ¯t0 ← 1
K
X
(di ,...,tdef
i ,... )∈K0
tdef
i
12: Kcand ← the K nearest {oi} to pcand
13: ¯tcand ← 1
K
X
(oi ,...,topt
i ,... )∈Kcand
topt
i
14: if ¯tcand < ¯t0 then
15: Hout ← Hcand
16: else
17: Hout ← ∅
18: end if
19: return Hout
3.4 Overall system design
Incoming
SQL query Q
Plan–Mapping
Algorithm
(Alg. 2)
Hint found
& passes
check?
Adaptive Hint Search
(Alg. 1)
Execute Q
with hint H
Embeddings storage
yes
no
(di, H∗
i , oi)
Fig. 2 : Overall-system control flow of LLM-PM.
To effectively combine the strengths of our embedding-based approach, we integrate
all proposed techniques into a unified query optimization pipeline. This hybrid design
is intended to (1) enable fast query optimization via Plan-Mapping when similar past
plans exist in the experience store, (2) fall back to a thorough hint search for novel
queries, and (3) improve overall performance over time through continual accumulation
of query execution experience. Figure 2 depicts the two-stage optimization pipeline.
1. Plan-Mapping stage The incoming SQL query Q is planned with all hints
enabled, embedded, and compared to the reference workload using Algorithm 2. If
the selected candidate hint Hcand passes the two-neighbourhood consistency test,
the query proceeds directly to execution with Hcand (“fast path”).
12

=== PAGE 13 ===
2. F allback to Adaptive Hint Search When Plan-Mapping returns no hint
(or the consistency test rejects the candidate), Q is forwarded to Algorithm 1.
This exhaustive yet timeout-pruned search inspects the entire space of 128
binary hint sets, finds the fastest configuration, and caches optimal observed
⟨default plan, optimal hint, optimal plan⟩ triplet for future use.
3. Execution and continual learning. Triplets produced by the fallback search
continuously enlarge the reference set, which the Plan-Mapping stage consults on
every new query (feedback arrow from store to map). Over time this feedback loop
shrinks the fraction of queries that require the slower exhaustive search, steadily
improving end-to-end latency.
This design yields low median latency—because most queries are solved by
the lightweight, embedding-based mapper—while guaranteeing that even “difficult”
queries eventually benefit from the thorough search routine.
4 Evaluation
In this chapter we first outline the experimental design—including datasets, baselines,
and implementation details—before detailing the quantitative and qualitative metrics
used to assess performance. We then present the results, analyze their statistical sig-
nificance, and discuss the practical implications that emerge. Finally, we highlight the
key insights learned from the evaluation, setting the stage for the conclusions that
follow.
4.1 Setup and dataset
0.2
 0.1
 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
10a
11a
11b
1a
2a
2b
2c
3a
3b
4a
5a
6a
7a
8a
9a
9b
Query groups
Fig. 3 : Default plans after PCA
The experiments were conducted on a server with 128 CPU cores based on HiSilicon
Kunpeng-920 processors, with a total of 1000 GB of RAM. Storage was provided by
a 2 TB SSD NVMe disk, offering high read/write speeds for fast data access. The
database used was single-node OpenGauss. The following configuration settings were
applied:
13

=== PAGE 14 ===
• shared buffers = 256 GB
• bulk write ring size = 10 GB
• work mem = 80 GB
• cstore buffers = 4 GB
• query dop = 1 (single-threaded query execution for optimal control over perfor-
mance)
The experiments were carried out on the IMDB dataset, which contains 3 133
queries drawn from the JOB-CEB workload. The dataset relies on 16 templates
from the original JOB benchmark, and each template contributes a different number
of queries. Plan embeddings were generated with OpenAI’s text-embedding-3-large
model, so every query is paired with both its default and optimized execution plans,
their embeddings, and the associated runtimes. Figure 3 illustrates how the default
plans are arranged after reducing the high-dimensional embeddings to two dimensions
with Principal Component Analysis (PCA). Each point denotes a single plan pro-
jected onto the first two principal components, and its color encodes the corresponding
query-group label shown in the legend.
Previous studies on PostgreSQL report that a handful of individual hints can
by themselves accelerate the JOB–CEB workload by more than 60 %; for example,
globally disabling nested-loop joins yields such a speed-up. In contrast, turning off the
same join operator in openGauss degrades performance by roughly 50 %, substantially
complicating the task of selecting an optimal hint set.
Table 4 (a) lists the ten most frequent optimal hint sets. For roughly half of the
queries the optimal configuration coincides with the default (all hints enabled); in
total, 86 of the 128 possible bit-vectors were selected as optimal at least once. Figure
4 (b) shows the global distribution of all observed hint sets. The leaders are diverse—
only disabling enable nestloop is not always the winning strategy.
(a)
Hintset Count
0000000 1468
0001100 226
1000100 146
1100100 114
0000100 106
0100100 46
0100000 45
0000001 43
1000000 41
0011100 40
(b)
Hintset
100
101
102
103
Count (log scale)
Hintset Distribution (log scale)
Fig. 4 : Hint-set statistics: (a) count table and (b) log-scale histogram.
14

=== PAGE 15 ===
4.2 Results
Figure 5 (a) summarizes the outcome of a ten-fold cross-validation: in each fold, 10 %
of the JOB-CEB queries were held out for testing, while the remaining 90 % seeded
the reference store for Plan-Mapping.
The aggregate runtime across the ten folds was, on average, reduced by 19.1 %
(i.e. queries run on average 1 .19× faster than the default optimizer). This gain is
robust: even the slowest fold achieves an +8 % speed-up, and the best fold +32 %.
The total aggregate speed-up achieved—computed by summing the runtimes of all
test queries—is 21.1 %. The maximum achievable speed-up for the entire workload
is 62.5 %. On an average fold , 20 % of queries accelerate, 20 % decelerate, and the
remaining 60 % are unaffected. The 90th-percentile execution time falls by 24.7 %,
while the median time improves slightly by 2.1 %.
(a)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Fold
Execution total
0
10
20
30
40
50
Boost (%)
Default
Boosted
Boost (%) (b)
Upper
percentile
bound
Mean
default
time
Mean
boosted
time Boost
0.1 564 628 -11
0.2 1658 1651 0
0.3 2812 2740 3
0.4 4203 4096 3
0.5 6144 5954 3
0.6 8617 8293 4
0.7 12802 11681 9
0.8 19809 17059 14
0.9 35201 27923 21
1.0 121154 90734 25
Fig. 5 : (a) Per-fold latency improvement under Plan-Mapping. (b) Percentile-level
breakdown of mean runtime and boost (%).
Table 5 (b) breaks average query runtime into percentile bands. The “Upper bound
for percentile” column gives the upper edge of each band; the lower edge is the previous
percentile. For example, the 0.5 row covers the 0.4–0.5 percentile slice. “Default” and
“Boosted” columns report the mean runtime inside each slice, while “Boost” shows
the percentage change within that slice. Plan-mapping delivers its largest gains in
the long-tail slices with the slowest queries, although a few low-latency slices show
occasional slow-downs.
4.3 Ablation study
A natural question is whether our learned LLM embeddings provide any real benefit
beyond acting as an expensive form of string matching. To answer it, we reran the
evaluation under two ablated configurations in which the consistency-check stage was
disabled, in order to eliminate the influence of the additional verification step and
assess whether LLM plan embeddings are truly useful for evaluating plan similarity
compared to simple string-based matching metrics:
15

=== PAGE 16 ===
1. Levenshtein distance – candidates are retrieved purely by the Levenshtein edit
distance;
2. LLM embeddings (no consistency check) – identical to our full system except
that the consistency check is omitted.
In the Levenshtein variant we no longer embed plans or compare vectors with the
Euclidean metric; instead we compute the edit distance
dlev(p1, p2) = min
π
|π|,
where π is a sequence of single-character insertions, deletions, or substitutions that
transforms plan string p1 into plan string p2.
Table 1 reports the total speed-up and the number of queries that exceeded the
450s time-out. Without the consistency check, the Levenshtein variant not only fails
to accelerate the workload: it slows it down by 64.4 % and triggers 87 time-outs.
By contrast, LLM embeddings still deliver a 16.1 % speed-up with only 5 time-
outs—five times fewer than Levenshtein and close to the default optimizer (3). When
the consistency check is re-enabled (Section 4.2), the speed-up rises to 21.1 % while
time-outs drop to a single query.
These observations confirm that the learned embeddings capture information well
beyond raw string similarity and, together with the consistency check, are essential
for robust performance gains.
Hint selection only Time-outs
Levenshtein −64.4% 87
LLM embeddings 16 .1% 5
T able 1 : Total latency change (positive =
speed-up) and number of time-outs for each dis-
tance metric
4.4 Discussion and future work
Our ablation study confirmed that learned LLM embeddings are valuable for hint
prediction, yet even state-of-the-art OpenAI embeddings are trained on very little
material that combines query plans with explicit information on how hints affect them.
A natural next step is therefore to develop or fine-tune domain-specific embeddings
whose training corpora contain not only rich SQL syntax but also detailed optimization
techniques, hint annotations, and cost feedback. Such embeddings could underpin more
powerful retrieval schemes and, more broadly, improve an LLM’s ability to reason
about the inherently complex task of database query optimization.
While the current Plan-Mapping pipeline delivers an average ≈ 20% accelera-
tion—roughly one-third of the theoretical maximum on this workload—it also exposes
16

=== PAGE 17 ===
clear opportunities for refinement. Half of the remaining gap arises during the
candidate-hint selection stage: in an oracle configuration, where the consistency check
is allowed to inspect the true runtimes of both default and candidate plans, we recoup
almost 40% of the attainable speed-up (two-thirds of the maximum). This suggests
that a more sophisticated similarity metric or voting mechanism for the first stage
could close much of the residual gap.
Hardware and engine heterogeneity further complicate direct comparisons. Previ-
ous work on PostgreSQL reported over 60% average speed-up from a single “disable
nested-loops” hint, yet on our openGauss platform the same hint regresses performance
by more than 50%. This observation motivates our multi-neighbourhood strategy and
highlights that no single hint is universally optimal.
5 Conclusion
We have presented LLM-PM, a lightweight, training-free framework that leverages pre-
trained LLM embeddings of execution plans to steer a traditional cost-based optimizer
via hint recommendations. One of the primary goals of this study was to evaluate the
utility of these embeddings, and our experiments provide clear evidence of their effec-
tiveness. Our method first identifies a locally popular hint set among the N nearest
default plans, then verifies its benefit through a two-neighbourhood consistency check
that compares average runtimes in both default and optimized plan regions. Impor-
tantly, this approach requires no changes to the underlying DBMS or extensive offline
training: it simply reuses past plan outcomes encoded in the embedding space.
We evaluated the core component of the LLM-PM system—Plan-Mapping—on
openGauss using standard benchmarks (JOB-CEB on the IMDB dataset), demonstrat-
ing its consistent improvements in query performance. Looking forward, promising
extensions include refining the embedding space with metric learning or hybrid plan-
SQL features and dynamically adapting neighbour sizes based on local density. These
enhancements could further narrow the gap toward optimal hint selection while pre-
serving the simplicity and practicality that make Plan-Mapping suitable for real-world
deployment.
References
[1] Marcus, R., Negi, P., Mao, H., Zhang, C., Alizadeh, M., Kraska, T., Papaem-
manouil, O., Tatbul, N.: Neo: a learned query optimizer. Proceedings of the
VLDB Endowment 12(11), 1705–1718 (2019) https://doi.org/10.14778/3342263.
3342644
[2] Kipf, A., Kipf, T., Radke, B., Leis, V., Boncz, P., Kemper, A.: Learned Cardinal-
ities: Estimating Correlated Joins with Deep Learning (2018). https://arxiv.org/
abs/1809.00677
[3] Woltmann, L., Hartmann, C., Thiele, M., Habich, D., Lehner, W.: Cardi-
nality estimation with local deep learning models. In: Proceedings of the
17

=== PAGE 18 ===
Second International Workshop on Exploiting Artificial Intelligence Tech-
niques for Data Management. aiDM ’19. Association for Computing Machin-
ery, New York, NY, USA (2019). https://doi.org/10.1145/3329859.3329875 .
https://doi.org/10.1145/3329859.3329875
[4] Ivanov, O., Bartunov, S.: Adaptive query optimization in PostgreSQL. In: Pro-
ceedings of PGCon 2017, Ottawa, Canada (2017). Conference presentation and
software available at https://github.com/postgrespro/aqo
[5] Vasilenko, N., Demin, A., Ponomaryov, D.: Adaptive Cost Model for Query
Optimization (2024). https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.17136
[6] Marcus, R., Negi, P., Mao, H., Tatbul, N., Alizadeh, M., Kraska, T.: Bao: Making
learned query optimization practical. In: Proceedings of the 2021 International
Conference on Management of Data. SIGMOD ’21, pp. 1275–1288. Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA (2021). https://doi.org/10.1145/
3448016.3452838 . https://doi.org/10.1145/3448016.3452838
[7] Anneser, C., Tatbul, N., Cohen, D., Xu, Z., Pandian, P., Laptev, N., Marcus, R.:
Autosteer: Learned query optimization for any sql database. Proc. VLDB Endow.
16(12), 3515–3527 (2023) https://doi.org/10.14778/3611540.3611544
[8] Woltmann, L., Thiessat, J., Hartmann, C., Habich, D., Lehner, W.: Fastgres:
Making learned query optimizer hinting effective. Proc. VLDB Endow. 16(11),
3310–3322 (2023) https://doi.org/10.14778/3611479.3611528
[9] Xu, X., Zhao, Z., Zhang, T., Kang, R., Sun, L., Chen, J.: COOOL: A Learning-
To-Rank Approach for SQL Hint Recommendations (2023). https://arxiv.org/
abs/2304.04407
[10] Zhu, R., Chen, W., Ding, B., Chen, X., Pfadler, A., Wu, Z., Zhou, J.: Lero: A
learning-to-rank query optimizer. Proc. VLDB Endow. 16(6), 1466–1479 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.14778/3583140.3583160
[11] Zinchenko, S., Iazov, S.: HERO: Hint-Based Efficient and Reliable Query Opti-
mizer (2024). https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.02372
[12] Tan, J., Zhao, K., Li, R., Yu, J.X., Piao, C., Cheng, H., Meng, H., Zhao, D., Rong,
Y.: Can Large Language Models Be Query Optimizer for Relational Databases?
(2025). https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.05562
[13] Akioyamen, P., Yi, Z., Marcus, R.: The Unreasonable Effectiveness of LLMs for
Query Optimization (2024). https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.02862
[14] Li, Z., Yuan, H., Wang, H., Cong, G., Bing, L.: LLM-R2: A Large Language Model
Enhanced Rule-based Rewrite System for Boosting Query Efficiency (2024).
https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.12872
18