=== PAGE 1 ===
Wider or Deeper? Scaling LLM Inference-Time
Compute with Adaptive Branching Tree Search
Yuichi Inoue∗, Kou Misaki∗, Yuki Imajuku, So Kuroki, Taishi Nakamura, Takuya Akiba
Sakana AI, Japan
{y.inoue, takiba}@sakana.ai
Abstract
Recent advances demonstrate that increasing inference-time computation can signif-
icantly boost the reasoning capabilities of large language models (LLMs). Although
repeated sampling (i.e., generating multiple candidate outputs) is a highly effec-
tive strategy, it does not leverage external feedback signals for refinement, which
are often available in real tasks like coding. In this work, we propose Adaptive
Branching Monte Carlo Tree Search (AB-MCTS), a novel inference-time frame-
work that generalizes repeated sampling with principled multi-turn exploration
and exploitation. At each node in the search tree, AB-MCTS dynamically de-
cides whether to “go wider” by expanding new candidate responses or “go deeper”
by revisiting existing ones based on external feedback signals. We evaluate our
method on complex coding and engineering tasks using frontier models. Empirical
results show that AB-MCTS outperforms both repeated sampling and standard
MCTS, underscoring the importance of combining the response diversity of LLMs
with multi-turn solution refinement for effective inference-time scaling. Code is
available at: https://github.com/SakanaAI/treequest.
1
Introduction
Recent work has shown that inference-time scaling, namely allocating more computation at inference
time, can markedly boost the performance of large language models (LLMs) on complex tasks. As
outlined in Section 2, existing approaches to inference-time scaling fall into three broad categories:
(1) post-training fine-tuning, (2) reward-guided chain-of-thought (CoT) generation, and (3) multiple
answer generation. In this paper, we focus on the third category. The multiple answer generation
approach repeatedly queries an LLM at non-zero temperature to produce a set of candidate outputs
and then selects the most promising one. This approach enhances the LLM’s problem-solving abilities
on-the-fly, without further training [1–11]. Because it is orthogonal to the other two families, it can
be seamlessly combined with them.
The most widely successful approach in this category is repeated sampling, which includes techniques
such as best-of-n sampling, majority voting, and self-consistency [2, 3, 12]. In repeated sampling,
an LLM at non-zero temperature generates multiple candidate outputs independently from the same
initial prompt, and a final solution is selected, typically by a simple heuristic. This paradigm has
proved effective on challenging benchmarks, including coding competitions [1, 3] and ARC-AGI [13].
The strategy leverages the diverse and vast output space exposed by LLM generation, and sampling
more responses increases the odds that one of them is high-quality. The empirical success of repeated
sampling underscores that harnessing this diversity is central to effective inference-time scaling.
However, repeated sampling focuses exclusively on exploration and lacks an explicit mechanism
for exploitation. In certain real-world scenarios, one can obtain external feedback on a candidate
∗Equal contribution. See author contributions for details.
Accepted as a spotlight at NeurIPS 2025.
arXiv:2503.04412v5  [cs.AI]  7 Nov 2025

=== PAGE 2 ===
Baseline 1: Repeated Sampling
Baseline 3: Standard MCTS
Baseline 2: Sequential Refinement
Ours: Adaptive Branching MCTS
Repeated sampling only goes wide (i.e. pure exploration)
Sequential refinement only goes deep (i.e. pure exploitation)
Task Prompt
Initial Answer
Refined Answer
…
Sample 𝒏answers
Refine 𝒏−𝟏times
Fixed branching factor
(3 in this example)
…
Task Prompt
Answers
Branch adaptively
when appropriate
…
AB-MCTS systematically decides whether to go wider or deeper
MCTS expands a node at most once with a fixed width
Figure 1: Visual comparison of AB-MCTS vs. baselines. Unlike baselines that are purely wide
(repeated sampling), purely deep (sequential refinement), or fixed-width (standard MCTS), AB-
MCTS dynamically decides whether to branch outward or drill down, unifying both search directions.
solution. For instance, in coding tasks, one can run tests to evaluate the correctness of generated
programs and gather feedback on how to improve them [4, 5, 14]. In such settings, it is natural to
select promising solutions and refine them based on available feedback, which repeated sampling
alone cannot accomplish effectively.
Several approaches [6, 7, 9–11, 15] have been proposed for exploration and exploitation in such
multi-turn settings, but the majority were designed before the power of inference-time scaling was
fully recognized. Consequently, these methods use a fixed “width”, i.e., they treat the number of
answers generated from a single prompt as a fixed hyperparameter. For example, methods based
on standard Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) use a fixed branching factor (i.e., the number of
child nodes per state) as a hyperparameter [9–11, 15]. As demonstrated by the success of repeated
sampling, effective inference-time scaling requires leveraging a diverse and vast output space, thus,
providing substantial evidence that a fixed width hinders scaling.
In this work, we propose Adaptive Branching Monte Carlo Tree Search (AB-MCTS), a novel inference-
time framework that generalizes repeated sampling with multi-turn exploration and exploitation
(Figure 1). The main technical challenge is to introduce unbounded branching into MCTS. Unlike
traditional MCTS, AB-MCTS does not fix the width as a static hyperparameter. Instead, at each node
of the search tree, AB-MCTS adaptively decides whether to explore (“go wider”) by generating new
candidate responses or exploit (“go deeper”) by refining existing ones, leveraging external feedback
signals. Under the hood, we formalize our decision process via Bayesian posterior updates, ensuring
each expansion balances exploration and exploitation in a principled manner. This design naturally
extends repeated sampling, allowing us to harness the diverse and vast output space of LLMs when
necessary. Consequently, our framework provides a powerful mechanism for balancing exploration
and exploitation in the context of LLM inference-time scaling.
We evaluated AB-MCTS on complex coding and machine learning engineering benchmarks [1, 16],
as well as ARC-AGI [17], using frontier models such as GPT-4o [18] and DeepSeek-V3 [19], in a
scenario that scales up inference-time compute by allowing multiple generation calls for each task
instance. Under the same computational budget, AB-MCTS achieved better results than previous
approaches, such as repeated sampling and standard MCTS.
Contributions. 1
⃝We highlight the challenge of effectively incorporating unbounded branching into
tree search. This is pivotal for combining the power of the diverse and vast output space of LLMs, a
cornerstone of inference-time scaling, with solution refinement. 2
⃝To address this challenge, we
introduce AB-MCTS, which systematically decides whether to “go wider” or “go deeper.” We present
two variants, AB-MCTS-M and AB-MCTS-A, based on different principles, each offering distinct
trade-offs. 3
⃝In a practical setting using frontier models and real-world complex tasks, we show that
AB-MCTS outperforms existing methods.
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
2
Related Work
Inference-Time Scaling by Post-Training Fine-Tuning. Recent post-training work, exemplified by
OpenAI o1/o3 [20, 21], uses reinforcement learning or supervised CoT fine-tuning to deepen LLM
reasoning and boost single-answer quality [20–25]. Our approach instead generates many candidates
and refines them with external feedback, pursuing a complementary objective.
Inference-Time Scaling via Reward-Guided CoT. Reward-guided CoT scales inference by search-
ing one step (typically a sentence) at a time [26–34]. Primarily for math tasks, it aims to improve
single-answer quality, making it orthogonal to our multiple-answer generation approach.
Inference-Time Scaling by Multiple Answer Generation. Since the community has come to
appreciate the power of inference-time scaling, the strategy that has been studied widely is repeated
sampling, in which the model generates many candidate answers and selects the best one [1–3,
35]. Although empirically strong and widely used, repeated sampling leaves obvious room for
improvement because it does not refine its candidates using external feedback [4, 5]. Before the era of
large-scale inference-time compute, a variety of task-specific strategies were proposed for relatively
small scales; examples include tree expansions directed by LLMs [6] and Bayesian methods [7].
LATS [9], RAP [15], SWE-Search [10], and RepoUnderstander [11] combine LLMs with MCTS,
primarily targeting sequential decision making. In this context, nodes represent states and edges
represent actions, which may involve interaction with an environment. LATS utilizes API calls and
code execution as actions to solve tasks. RAP addresses the process of solving block-moving puzzles
and mathematical word problems step-by-step. SWE-Search explores sequences of actions such as
searching, editing, and running tests to resolve issues within a software repository. RepoUnderstander
employs MCTS for exploration on a repository knowledge graph. The application of LATS to
coding tasks [9, Section 5.2] aligns with the context of multiple-answer generation in this paper and
corresponds to what we refer to as “standard MCTS” in our experiments.
Progressive Widening in MCTS. Progressive widening (PW) [36, 37] is a classic technique that
gradually increases actions considered per node. It was designed for games with unique actions
and no side information for untried moves, relying on visit-count heuristics. Complementary to PW,
Sokota et al. [38] propose “abstraction refining”, which groups similar successors using a decreasing
similarity threshold and shows advantages over PW under equal simulation budgets in stochastic
domains. Our approach differs as new branches are sampled from the same LLM. This homogeneity
in generation allows a principled statistical rule for choosing between widening and deepening.
3
Method
3.1
Preliminaries
First, we introduce the setup and notation, with detailed elaboration provided in Appendix A.1. We
consider a setting where an LLM, represented by a function fLLM, receives a textual prompt tin
containing (1) task instructions with optional few-shot examples, and/or (2) previously generated
outputs along with external feedback, and generates an answer tout = fLLM(tin). A scoring function
R then evaluates an answer tout to produce a score r = R(tout), where higher scores indicate better
performance. We typically assume that the score r is normalized to the range [0, 1], but our framework
allows for arbitrary ranges as well. Our goal is to find an output tout that attains a high score r under
limited calls to the LLM at inference time. Such tasks arise, for example, in code generation, where
the correctness or quality of the output can be quantified; for instance, R may execute the generated
code and return the fraction of test cases passed. In some cases, the true score evaluator may be
inaccessible (e.g., hidden test cases), so we assume we have access to some surrogate or partial
evaluator R, such as a public test evaluator, during the search. We aim to leverage this evaluator to
guide an efficient search for better solutions.
3.2
Adaptive Branching MCTS
MCTS for LLM-based Answer Generation. We perform the answer search by constructing a
search tree T, in which each non-root node N is associated with an LLM-generated answer to a given
task. Our goal is to construct T so that it contains answers with scores as high as possible.
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
AB-MCTS-M Example Tree
a0
a1
a2
a3
N
r = 0.8
r = 0
r = 0.2
GEN
r = 0.8
r = 0.3
GEN
GEN
GEN
r = 1.0
Posterior Predictive Distribution
a0
a1
a2
a3
0.0
0.5
1.0
N1
Tsub(N1)
Tsub(N2)
Tsub(N3)
N2
N3
r
Figure 2: Example tree structure and score posterior predictive distributions for AB-MCTS with
mixed models (AB-MCTS-M). Here, a1 leads to a set of child nodes with higher scores, causing a
peak at larger r. As more child samples are collected, the variance of the distribution decreases.
Algorithm 1 Adaptive Branching MCTS
1: function AB-MCTS(nnodes)
2:
T ←INITIALIZETREE( )
3:
for n = 1, . . . , nnodes do
4:
N ←SELECTEXPANSIONTARGET(T)
▷Step 1. Select an expansion target
5:
Nnew ←EXPAND(N, T)
▷Step 2. Expand the selected node to generate a child
6:
SCOREBACKUP(Nnew, T)
▷Step 3. Backup the score from the generated node
7:
return SELECTBEST(T)
8: function SELECTEXPANSIONTARGET(T)
9:
N ←GETROOT(T)
10:
while not ISLEAF(N) do
11:
Nnext ←SELECTCHILD(N, T)
▷Detailed in Sections 3.3 and 3.4
12:
if ISGENNODE(Nnext) then
▷If a GEN node is selected, branch off from the node
13:
break
14:
N ←Nnext
15:
return N
For this purpose, we employ MCTS, formulated iteratively as follows. Starting from a single root
node, we perform nnodes iterations, each adding one new node, resulting in a total of 1 + nnodes nodes.
Each iteration has three steps: (1) Selection, where we select a node N for expansion; (2) Expansion,
where we expand N by generating a new answer from node N, creating a new child node Nnew
and appending it to N. Specifically, if N is the root, the new answer is directly generated from the
task prompt; if N is non-root, the new answer refines the answer associated with N, using external
feedback; and (3) Score backup, where we propagate the score of Nnew up toward the root of the
tree T. We adopt different backup rules in our proposed methods (see Section 3.3 and 3.4). In our
setting, no separate rollout is needed, since each node’s score r can be evaluated directly once an
output is generated. After nnodes iterations, we select the best node based on a chosen criterion.
In standard MCTS, only leaf nodes are selected and expanded, (i.e., each node is expanded at most
once), and the expansion adds a fixed number of child nodes. However, since each query to an LLM
at non-zero temperature can yield different outputs from the same prompt, the branching factor is
theoretically infinite. To accommodate such unbounded branching, we relax the standard MCTS
constraints and allow selection and expansion of non-leaf nodes. Moreover, recent studies [3] suggest
that drawing many outputs from the same prompt at non-zero temperature can improve performance.
Allowing unbounded branching enables us to fully exploit these varied samples, whereas restricting
the branching factor could miss correct answer generations and undermine overall performance.
Adaptive Branching via the GEN Node. To fully leverage the potential performance improvement
from unbounded branching, we allow nodes that have already been expanded once to be expanded
again and further branched, unlike in standard MCTS. To explicitly represent the action of generating
new child nodes, we introduce a GEN node. Every node N (including newly expanded ones during
iterations) has a GEN node as a child. When the GEN node with parent node N is selected during the
selection step, we expand N by adding a new child node. Algorithm 1 outlines this approach, called
Adaptive Branching Monte Carlo Tree Search (AB-MCTS).
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
The only remaining component we need is a selection policy, including when to select a GEN
node. We propose two algorithms with different selection policies: AB-MCTS-M (Mixed model)
and AB-MCTS-A (node Aggregation). Both follow the overall procedure in Algorithm 1 and use
Thompson sampling to balance exploration and exploitation.
The UCT score is inapplicable to our AB-MCTS because GEN nodes make the problem fundamentally
different from a standard multi-armed bandit problem, for which UCT was designed. In standard
MCTS, the arms (branches) are static. In contrast, the GEN node in AB-MCTS dynamically generates
new arms. This special problem setting, where arms are generated on the fly, prevents the direct
application of UCT. We, therefore, adopt a Bayesian probabilistic model. This enables Thompson
sampling based on the posterior distribution and obviates the need for complex UCB-style confidence
bound analysis.
Thompson Sampling for Node Selection. In our proposed methods, we employ a Bayesian approach
with Thompson sampling for node selection. Here, we employ Thompson sampling because GEN
nodes do not have child nodes, making it impossible to compute their UCT scores. In addition,
Thompson sampling has the advantage of allowing node expansion in parallel. This is particularly
beneficial when evaluating node scores is time-consuming, as in the case of MLE-Bench (See
Appendix B.1 for MLE-Bench details).
Concretely, during SelectChild step at line 11 of Algorithm 1, we employ Thompson sampling
to decide between expanding a GEN node or selecting from existing child nodes at node N. Let N
be a node with potential actions
AN = {a0, a1, . . . , anchild},
where the action a0 corresponds to choosing the GEN node, and a1, . . . , anchild correspond to
choosing the already-existing child nodes. Suppose PN(r | ai) is the posterior predictive distribution
of the score r for an eventually expanded new node (Nnew at line 5 of Algorithm 1) if we choose the
action ai at node N. Then Thompson sampling proceeds by,
1. Calculate PN(r | aj) for each action aj at node N.
2. Draw scores rNnew,aj from PN(r | aj) for each action aj.
3. Select ˆa = arg maxaj∈AN rNnew,aj.
This three-step process corresponds to a single call to SelectChild.
A key question is how to perform step 1, i.e., how to model and calculate PN(r | aj) for all aj, in
particular for j = 0 (i.e., GEN node). We address this with two strategies: a mixed Bayesian model
(AB-MCTS-M) and a node aggregation method (AB-MCTS-A). In both cases, we model the score
probability distributions by Bayesian posterior predictives, but with different statistical models.
3.3
AB-MCTS-M: Adaptive Branching MCTS with Mixed Model
To model PN(r | aj), we employ a node-specific mixed model fitted individually at each node N.
That is, we fit a separate model for each N every time SelectChild in Algorithm 1 is invoked.
Denoting rNnew,aj ∼PN(r | aj) as a score of an eventually expanded node Nnew if we choose an
action aj at N, our mixed model is given as:
rNnew,aj = αj + σyϵNnew,
αj = µα + σαϵj,
ϵNnew ∼N(0, 1),
ϵj ∼N(0, 1),
(1)
Here, αj is a “group-level” intercept capturing the quality of the base solution at Nj, while σyϵNnew
represents per-instance noise. To fit this model, we place priors on the hyperparameters (µα, σα, σy)
and employ Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) to sample from their posterior distribution. The
GEN node (action a0) is treated as a newly introduced group without its own direct observations.
However, its group-level intercept α0 is inferred not from the prior alone but rather from the posterior
distribution over µα and σα, which is informed by the other observed data. We assume that even
after multiple refinement stages, the quality associated with the answer at node Nj continues to be
captured by this shared parameter (see Appendix A.3.2 for further details).
Algorithm Outline. To model PN(r | aj), AB-MCTS-M assigns each subtree under Nj, denoted
as Tsub(Nj), as a distinct group j (see Figure 2 for example subtree). The mixed model leverages
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
observed scores from these groups to compute the posterior predictive distributions of expected scores
for new nodes generated from each group (See Figure 2 for a schematic illustration). We sample the
scores from all the groups (the GEN node and Tsub(Nj)) using calculated posterior predictives. If
the GEN node’s sampled score is highest, we call fLLM to generate a new child node. Otherwise, we
choose the child node Nj with the highest score and continue the sampling step.
Score Backup Mechanism. When a new node N is created, its observed score is added to the
histories of N and its ancestors. This cumulative record is used to update the posterior distributions
in the mixed model. The observed score is not backed up to a GEN node, but it indirectly influences
the GEN node’s score probability distribution through the shared parameters in the mixed model (see
Appendix A.5 for a detailed walkthrough).
3.4
AB-MCTS-A: Adaptive Branching MCTS with Node Aggregation
In AB-MCTS-M, during the selection step at N, we use a mixed model that shares statistical strength
across groups through the shared model parameters. In contrast, AB-MCTS-A is designed in the
same spirit as the standard UCT-based MCTS, and there are no shared model parameters among the
different actions. This design simplifies the statistical modeling and makes the computation more
lightweight compared to AB-MCTS-M.
The major problem is how to back up scores to GEN nodes. Since the generated node is not attached
as a child to a GEN node, it makes the backup of scores difficult to define. Here, we introduce
a CONT node at the same tree level as all the GEN nodes (see Figure 3). Intuitively, the CONT
node represents the action of continuing refinement from the current answer at node N, rather than
generating a new node. By explicitly separating these two actions–generating new answers (GEN)
and refining existing answers (CONT)–we create a clear path for score propagation. Specifically, the
score of the expanded node is first backed up to the GEN node, and since all ancestors of the GEN
node are either nodes with LLM answers or CONT nodes, the score subsequently does not propagate
through other GEN nodes (see Figure 3 for an example tree).
AB-MCTS-A Example Tree
a0
a1 a2
a3
r = 0.8
r = 0.8
r = 0
r = 0.2
r = 0.3
N
GEN
CONT
GEN
GEN
CONT
GEN
CONT
r = 1.0
Figure 3: Example tree structure for AB-MCTS-
A. All child nodes are aggregated under a CONT
node, and a GEN node doesn’t have child nodes.
Algorithm Outline. AB-MCTS-A aggregates
all child nodes under a single CONT node,
which represents refinements from existing child
nodes (see Figure 3). We model each node’s
score probability in a Bayesian framework and
perform Thompson sampling on posterior pre-
dictives to decide between generating a new
child (GEN) or refining an existing one (CONT).
In contrast to AB-MCTS-M, we do not use
shared parameters among different node proba-
bility distributions.
To model PN(r | aj), we utilize exponential
family distributions with conjugate priors, en-
abling analytical and efficient posterior updates.
We employ two variants:
1. AB-MCTS-A (Gaussian), using a normal-inverse-χ2 prior for unbounded scores: PN(r |
aj) = p(r | {rk}K
k=1) = N(r | ˆm, σ2
ˆκ )χ−2(σ2 | ˆν, ˆτ 2), and
2. AB-MCTS-A (Beta), using a Beta prior for scores in [0, 1]: PN(r | aj) = p(r | {rk}K
k=1) =
B(r | ˆα, ˆβ),
where rk represents the scores backed up to the node Nj (GEN node, CONT node or LLM-generated
child nodes; see Figure 3 for example tree), where ˆm, ˆκ, ˆν, ˆτ, ˆα, ˆβ are determined from observed
scores rk and updated as these scores are backed up. The detailed parameter update rules are given in
Appendix A.4.
Score Backup Mechanism. During score-backup operations, the expanded node score is backed
up to the GEN node which led to the expansion of that node and the GEN node’s ancestors (see
Appendix A.5 for a detailed walkthrough). As we can see from Figure 3, a GEN node’s ancestors
include only generated nodes and CONT nodes, so the score is backed up to a GEN node only from
6

=== PAGE 7 ===
Table 1: Performance of AB-MCTS against baselines across benchmarks and models. This table
compares AB-MCTS with the baseline methods. Evaluations were performed on LiveCodeBench,
CodeContest, and ARC-AGI using GPT-4o and DeepSeek-V3 with a maximum generation budget
(27). Each entry provides a performance score (higher values are better) and its corresponding rank
(in parentheses, 1st is best). The “Avg. Rank” column shows the average rank across all settings.
LiveCodeBench
CodeContest
ARC-AGI
Method
GPT-4o
DeepSeek-V3
GPT-4o
DeepSeek-V3
GPT-4o
DeepSeek-V3 Avg.
Rank
Repeated Sampling
37.8 ± 0.5 (4) 40.7 ± 1.9 (6) 37.9 ± 0.3 (4) 43.2 ± 0.9 (5) 15.0 ± 1.0 (1) 18.6 ± 1.0 (1)
3.5
Sequential Refinement 37.8 ± 2.4 (4) 41.6 ± 0.6 (5) 30.1 ± 0.3 (6) 41.6 ± 0.9 (6) 8.7 ± 0.9 (6) 10.0 ± 0.6 (6)
5.5
Standard MCTS
36.7 ± 1.0 (6) 43.2 ± 2.1 (1) 37.5 ± 0.0 (5) 43.8 ± 0.9 (3) 9.0 ± 1.5 (5) 14.0 ± 1.5 (5)
4.2
AB-MCTS-M
38.9 ± 1.9 (2) 43.0 ± 1.5 (2) 40.6 ± 1.0 (1) 44.6 ± 0.9 (2) 12.3 ± 1.2 (4) 16.0 ± 1.0 (3)
2.3
AB-MCTS-A (Gaussian) 39.1 ± 1.9 (1) 42.5 ± 1.5 (3) 40.2 ± 1.7 (3) 43.4 ± 0.9 (4) 13.0 ± 3.6 (3) 18.3 ± 0.6 (2)
2.7
AB-MCTS-A (Beta)
38.7 ± 1.2 (3) 42.3 ± 0.8 (4) 40.4 ± 0.3 (2) 44.8 ± 0.6 (1) 14.0 ± 2.1 (2) 16.6 ± 0.6 (4)
2.7
the node that is created by choosing that GEN node. The backed-up score is used to update prior
probability distribution parameters.
4
Experiments
4.1
Experimental Setup
Benchmarks. We evaluated AB-MCTS on four diverse benchmarks that require complex problem-
solving: LiveCodeBench [14], CodeContest [1], ARC-AGI [17], and MLE-Bench [16]. Live-
CodeBench and CodeContest consist of competitive programming problems that demand mathe-
matical and algorithmic reasoning. ARC-AGI involves abstracting a common transformation rule
from visual patterns and implementing it as code. MLE-Bench, derived from Kaggle competitions,
involves constructing and optimizing machine learning models to achieve high scores based on the
evaluation metrics of each competition. For all these benchmarks, LLMs generate Python code to
solve each task, and external feedback (e.g., test case results, validation scores) is available to guide
the search. More details on the benchmarks can be found in Appendix B.1.
Models. We perform our experiments using GPT-4o (gpt-4o-2024-08-06) [18], and DeepSeek-
V3 (deepseek-chat) [19]. Each LLM generates a complete solution in a single API call. We
define the generation budget as the maximum number of API calls and set it to 27 = 128. The
temperature was set to 0.6 for GPT-4o following [3] and 1.0 for DeepSeek-V3 following the official
documentation.
Baselines. We benchmark AB-MCTS against three representative approaches. (1) Repeated Sam-
pling (Best-of-n) [1, 3, 39] independently generates up to n candidate solutions from a single LLM
prompt, a simple yet competitive baseline for coding tasks. (2) Sequential Refinement [4] iteratively
improves each solution by re-prompting the LLM with its own output and feedback. (3) Standard
MCTS follows the configuration from LATS [9, Section 5.2] (See also Appendix C.8). Each ex-
pansion adds five child nodes, and the search proceeds until it reaches the 27 nodes, with the final
expansion creating only three nodes to meet this limit precisely. Hyper-parameters for AB-MCTS are
summarized in Appendix B.2.
4.2
Results
Table 2: Performance on MLE-Bench tasks. AB-MCTS-M
demonstrates robust performance, achieving the best average
rank across diverse ML tasks.
Method
Nomad2018
Spooky.
Pizza.
Avg.
Repeated Sampling
0.065 (3)
0.47 (4)
0.72 (2)
3.0
Sequential Refinement
0.059 (1)
0.46 (3)
0.62 (3)
2.3
Standard MCTS
0.076 (4)
0.45 (2)
0.60 (4)
3.3
AB-MCTS-M
0.060 (2)
0.38 (1)
0.72 (1)
1.3
As detailed in Tables 1 and 2, our
comprehensive evaluations reveal AB-
MCTS as a consistently superior ap-
proach across diverse benchmarks and
LLMs, achieving the top average rank
and outperforming established base-
lines. This consistent success stems
from the distinctive ability of AB-
7

=== PAGE 8 ===
Standard MCTS
Sequential Refinement
Repeated Sampling
AB−MCTS−A (Gaussian)
AB−MCTS−A (Beta)
AB−MCTS−M
CodeContest
(higher is better)
ARC-AGI
(higher is better)
LiveCodeBench
(higher is better)
Figure 4: Performance comparison on LiveCodeBench, CodeContest, and ARC-AGI. We
compare the six methods using GPT-4o by plotting the success rate against the generation budget.
The inset plots provide a detailed view of performance at a maximum generation budget (27); the
mean success rate, its 95% confidence interval, and the results from the individual runs are shown.
Variance at a generation budget of 20 arises from conducting each experiment independently with
nonzero temperature. See Figure 6 for experiments on ARC-AGI with a larger budget.
Standard MCTS
Sequential Refinement
Repeated Sampling
AB−MCTS−A (Gaussian)
AB−MCTS−A (Beta)
AB−MCTS−M
CodeContest
(higher is better)
ARC-AGI
(higher is better)
LiveCodeBench
(higher is better)
Figure 5: Comparing algorithms by search tree shape and performance. Each point shows the
performance against the average tree shape for a given algorithm at a specific generation budget. The
x-axis represents the log-ratio of mean depth to mean width. Mean width is the average number of
nodes per depth. Larger and smaller x-axis values indicate deeper and wider searches, respectively.
MCTS to dynamically adapt its search strategy by precisely balancing exploration and exploitation to
the varying demands of each problem, an adaptability largely absent in baseline methods. We next
detail these results by benchmark, followed by an analysis of the search behavior of AB-MCTS.
LiveCodeBench and CodeContest. Figure 4 (left and center) reports the success rate (Pass@1) ver-
sus the generation budget for GPT-4o on LiveCodeBench and CodeContest. As expected, all methods
demonstrate improved performance with increasing computational budget. On both benchmarks,
AB-MCTS algorithms generally outperform the baseline methods. Notably, on LiveCodeBench
(Figure 4 left), AB-MCTS starts to pull ahead of the baselines even with a small budget of 23. On
CodeContest (Figure 4 center), AB-MCTS demonstrates superior performance compared to baselines
at larger budgets of 25 and beyond. Appendix Figure 8 shows that while standard MCTS performs
relatively well with DeepSeek-V3 compared to GPT-4o, our proposed methods achieve a comparable
success rate on LiveCodeBench and surpass standard MCTS on CodeContest.
ARC-AGI. Figure 4 (right) shows the performance on ARC-AGI, a particularly challenging bench-
mark. Following ARC-AGI’s official evaluation protocol, we report Pass@2 (Pass@1 is also reported
in Appendix C.6). Consistent with previous work [13], repeated sampling proves to be a strong
baseline in our setup, indicating the importance of broad exploration for this task. While standard
8

=== PAGE 9 ===
Root
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
125
126
127
128
Random Acts of Pizza: AB-MCTS-M
0.68
0.70
0.72
0.74
0.76
0.78
Figure 7: Example search tree generated by AB-MCTS-M on Random Acts of Pizza (MLE-
Bench). The figure shows how AB-MCTS-M dynamically balances exploration and exploitation.
Each node represents a solution. Nodes are colored according to their evaluation score used as the
search signal for AB-MCTS-M. The number inside each node indicates the order of generation. Grey
nodes mark candidates whose code failed to execute and therefore received no score.
MCTS yields only marginal improvements with larger budgets, our AB-MCTS framework achieves
performance comparable to repeated sampling. This suggests AB-MCTS’s capability to effectively
explore potentially by dynamically widening its search when beneficial. Similar results were observed
with DeepSeek-V3, as detailed in Appendix Figure 8.
MLE-Bench. Table 2 and Appendix Figure 10 present the performance on three competitions from
MLE-Bench using GPT-4o. Since MLE-Bench requires substantial GPU resources for training
and evaluating machine learning models, we exclusively used GPT-4o and focused on the baseline
methods and AB-MCTS-M (see also Appendix B.1). The best-performing baseline method varies
across competitions. This again highlights that different tasks benefit from different exploration-
exploitation trade-offs. In contrast, AB-MCTS-M consistently delivers strong performance in these
tasks. This consistent success across diverse competitions underscores AB-MCTS-M’s inherent
strength in effectively adapting its search strategy to varying problem structures.
4.3
Analysis
Standard MCTS
Sequential Refinement
Repeated Sampling
AB−MCTS−A (Gaussian)
AB−MCTS−A (Beta)
AB−MCTS−M
Figure 6: Performance comparison on ARC-
AGI with increased budget. Scalability of AB-
MCTS was assessed with a generation budget ex-
tended up to 512. Plotted points represent moving
averages to clarify performance trends.
Analysis of Search Behavior:
Width vs.
Depth.
To quantitatively analyze how AB-
MCTS balances exploration and exploitation,
we examined the average depth and the average
width at each depth of the generated search trees.
Figure 5 shows that AB-MCTS methods tend
to generate wider trees compared to standard
MCTS. This occurs because AB-MCTS can
adaptively decide to explore wider (select the
GEN node) from any existing node, unlike stan-
dard MCTS. This mechanism allows for more
flexible exploration across various tree depths
(See also Appendix C.7). In addition to this
flexibility in exploring wider, as seen in Table 2,
AB-MCTS also achieves strong performance on
benchmarks where sequential refinement excels,
suggesting that AB-MCTS effectively identifies
and exploits promising branches by selecting
existing child nodes for refinement. This adap-
tive nature allows it to combine the strengths of exploration and exploitation, resulting in robust
performance across diverse benchmarks.
Scaling with Increased Budget. Highly complex problems often require a substantial generation
budget to find a correct solution. ARC-AGI is a prime example, where extensive exploration via
repeated sampling is known to improve performance even at large budgets as reported in [13]. To
investigate the scaling properties of our approach, we extended the experiments on ARC-AGI using
DeepSeek-V3 with a larger generation budget up to 29 = 512. As shown in Figure 6, the performance
9

=== PAGE 10 ===
of AB-MCTS continues to improve substantially as the budget increases from 200 to 500, while
the improvement rate of repeated sampling begins to plateau. Standard MCTS also continues to
improve with a larger budget, yet shows a significantly lower success rate compared to the AB-MCTS
methods. This performance gap highlights that AB-MCTS is more effective at directing its search
towards promising branches within the search tree at large computational scales.
Qualitative Analysis of the Search Trees. Figure 7 and Appendix Figure 11 present example search
trees generated by AB-MCTS-M and standard MCTS. These visualizations illustrate more adaptive
branching by AB-MCTS-M compared to standard MCTS. This adaptive nature reveals that AB-
MCTS-M flexibly balances exploration and exploitation throughout the search process, dynamically
allocating budget to explore diverse new candidates (“going wider”) and refine promising ones
(“going deeper”). Further discussion can be found in Appendix C.3.
Efficiency and Performance against Repeated Sampling. While repeated sampling benefits from
potential efficiencies such as parallel sampling and no feedback computation costs, our results
demonstrate the significant advantages of AB-MCTS. On ARC-AGI, where repeated sampling is
notably strong, AB-MCTS not only continues to improve with increased budget but also ultimately
achieves performance levels that repeated sampling cannot reach (Figure 6). Furthermore, on
LiveCodeBench and CodeContest, AB-MCTS variants can reach the peak performance of repeated
sampling substantially earlier in many cases (Figure 4, Appendix Figure 8). This indicates that
even when accounting for the inherent advantages of repeated sampling, AB-MCTS emerges as a
promising approach to efficiently use the generation budget to achieve superior results in diverse
scenarios.
5
Conclusions
This paper introduced Adaptive Branching Monte Carlo Tree Search (AB-MCTS), a novel inference-
time framework to enhance LLM performance on complex tasks by effectively integrating multi-turn
exploration and exploitation. Unlike previous methods, AB-MCTS dynamically decides to “go wider”
or “go deeper” based on external feedback, leveraging Bayesian decision-making. Our experimental
results show AB-MCTS outperforms repeated sampling and standard MCTS, demonstrating the value
of adaptively handling the challenge of unbounded branching for effective inference-time scaling.
Limitations. Our approach assumes the existence of a reliable score evaluator, but developing
such an evaluator itself can be challenging depending on the task. Future work could also explore
search strategies that incorporate more fine-grained real-world cost factors beyond API call counts,
potentially enhancing the practical utility of AB-MCTS. We believe that addressing these challenges
will further enhance the applicability of AB-MCTS across a wider range of problems.
Author Contributions
Kou Misaki co-designed AB-MCTS and implemented its algorithm and core experimental code.
Yuichi Inoue designed and led the experiments, proposed and conducted the experimental analysis,
and co-led experimental code development. Yuki Imajuku conducted the CodeContest and Live-
CodeBench experiments and co-led experimental code development. So Kuroki implemented and
conducted the MLE-Bench experiments. Taishi Nakamura conducted the ARC-AGI experiments.
Takuya Akiba initiated the project, co-designed AB-MCTS, advised on experimental code design,
and provided overall supervision. All authors contributed to experimental code development, results
interpretation, and manuscript refinement.
