=== PAGE 1 ===
Wider or Deeper? Scaling LLM Inference-Time
Compute with Adaptive Branching Tree Search
Yuichi Inoue∗, Kou Misaki∗, Yuki Imajuku, So Kuroki, Taishi Nakamura, Takuya Akiba
Sakana AI, Japan
{y.inoue, takiba}@sakana.ai
Abstract
Recent advances demonstrate that increasing inference-time computation can signif-
icantly boost the reasoning capabilities of large language models (LLMs). Although
repeated sampling (i.e., generating multiple candidate outputs) is a highly effec-
tive strategy, it does not leverage external feedback signals for refinement, which
are often available in real tasks like coding. In this work, we propose Adaptive
Branching Monte Carlo Tree Search (AB-MCTS), a novel inference-time frame-
work that generalizes repeated sampling with principled multi-turn exploration
and exploitation. At each node in the search tree, AB-MCTS dynamically de-
cides whether to “go wider” by expanding new candidate responses or “go deeper”
by revisiting existing ones based on external feedback signals. We evaluate our
method on complex coding and engineering tasks using frontier models. Empirical
results show that AB-MCTS outperforms both repeated sampling and standard
MCTS, underscoring the importance of combining the response diversity of LLMs
with multi-turn solution refinement for effective inference-time scaling. Code is
available at: https://github.com/SakanaAI/treequest.
1
Introduction
Recent work has shown that inference-time scaling, namely allocating more computation at inference
time, can markedly boost the performance of large language models (LLMs) on complex tasks. As
outlined in Section 2, existing approaches to inference-time scaling fall into three broad categories:
(1) post-training fine-tuning, (2) reward-guided chain-of-thought (CoT) generation, and (3) multiple
answer generation. In this paper, we focus on the third category. The multiple answer generation
approach repeatedly queries an LLM at non-zero temperature to produce a set of candidate outputs
and then selects the most promising one. This approach enhances the LLM’s problem-solving abilities
on-the-fly, without further training [1–11]. Because it is orthogonal to the other two families, it can
be seamlessly combined with them.
The most widely successful approach in this category is repeated sampling, which includes techniques
such as best-of-n sampling, majority voting, and self-consistency [2, 3, 12]. In repeated sampling,
an LLM at non-zero temperature generates multiple candidate outputs independently from the same
initial prompt, and a final solution is selected, typically by a simple heuristic. This paradigm has
proved effective on challenging benchmarks, including coding competitions [1, 3] and ARC-AGI [13].
The strategy leverages the diverse and vast output space exposed by LLM generation, and sampling
more responses increases the odds that one of them is high-quality. The empirical success of repeated
sampling underscores that harnessing this diversity is central to effective inference-time scaling.
However, repeated sampling focuses exclusively on exploration and lacks an explicit mechanism
for exploitation. In certain real-world scenarios, one can obtain external feedback on a candidate
∗Equal contribution. See author contributions for details.
Accepted as a spotlight at NeurIPS 2025.
arXiv:2503.04412v5  [cs.AI]  7 Nov 2025

=== PAGE 2 ===
Baseline 1: Repeated Sampling
Baseline 3: Standard MCTS
Baseline 2: Sequential Refinement
Ours: Adaptive Branching MCTS
Repeated sampling only goes wide (i.e. pure exploration)
Sequential refinement only goes deep (i.e. pure exploitation)
Task Prompt
Initial Answer
Refined Answer
…
Sample 𝒏answers
Refine 𝒏−𝟏times
Fixed branching factor
(3 in this example)
…
Task Prompt
Answers
Branch adaptively
when appropriate
…
AB-MCTS systematically decides whether to go wider or deeper
MCTS expands a node at most once with a fixed width
Figure 1: Visual comparison of AB-MCTS vs. baselines. Unlike baselines that are purely wide
(repeated sampling), purely deep (sequential refinement), or fixed-width (standard MCTS), AB-
MCTS dynamically decides whether to branch outward or drill down, unifying both search directions.
solution. For instance, in coding tasks, one can run tests to evaluate the correctness of generated
programs and gather feedback on how to improve them [4, 5, 14]. In such settings, it is natural to
select promising solutions and refine them based on available feedback, which repeated sampling
alone cannot accomplish effectively.
Several approaches [6, 7, 9–11, 15] have been proposed for exploration and exploitation in such
multi-turn settings, but the majority were designed before the power of inference-time scaling was
fully recognized. Consequently, these methods use a fixed “width”, i.e., they treat the number of
answers generated from a single prompt as a fixed hyperparameter. For example, methods based
on standard Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) use a fixed branching factor (i.e., the number of
child nodes per state) as a hyperparameter [9–11, 15]. As demonstrated by the success of repeated
sampling, effective inference-time scaling requires leveraging a diverse and vast output space, thus,
providing substantial evidence that a fixed width hinders scaling.
In this work, we propose Adaptive Branching Monte Carlo Tree Search (AB-MCTS), a novel inference-
time framework that generalizes repeated sampling with multi-turn exploration and exploitation
(Figure 1). The main technical challenge is to introduce unbounded branching into MCTS. Unlike
traditional MCTS, AB-MCTS does not fix the width as a static hyperparameter. Instead, at each node
of the search tree, AB-MCTS adaptively decides whether to explore (“go wider”) by generating new
candidate responses or exploit (“go deeper”) by refining existing ones, leveraging external feedback
signals. Under the hood, we formalize our decision process via Bayesian posterior updates, ensuring
each expansion balances exploration and exploitation in a principled manner. This design naturally
extends repeated sampling, allowing us to harness the diverse and vast output space of LLMs when
necessary. Consequently, our framework provides a powerful mechanism for balancing exploration
and exploitation in the context of LLM inference-time scaling.
We evaluated AB-MCTS on complex coding and machine learning engineering benchmarks [1, 16],
as well as ARC-AGI [17], using frontier models such as GPT-4o [18] and DeepSeek-V3 [19], in a
scenario that scales up inference-time compute by allowing multiple generation calls for each task
instance. Under the same computational budget, AB-MCTS achieved better results than previous
approaches, such as repeated sampling and standard MCTS.
Contributions. 1
⃝We highlight the challenge of effectively incorporating unbounded branching into
tree search. This is pivotal for combining the power of the diverse and vast output space of LLMs, a
cornerstone of inference-time scaling, with solution refinement. 2
⃝To address this challenge, we
introduce AB-MCTS, which systematically decides whether to “go wider” or “go deeper.” We present
two variants, AB-MCTS-M and AB-MCTS-A, based on different principles, each offering distinct
trade-offs. 3
⃝In a practical setting using frontier models and real-world complex tasks, we show that
AB-MCTS outperforms existing methods.
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
2
Related Work
Inference-Time Scaling by Post-Training Fine-Tuning. Recent post-training work, exemplified by
OpenAI o1/o3 [20, 21], uses reinforcement learning or supervised CoT fine-tuning to deepen LLM
reasoning and boost single-answer quality [20–25]. Our approach instead generates many candidates
and refines them with external feedback, pursuing a complementary objective.
Inference-Time Scaling via Reward-Guided CoT. Reward-guided CoT scales inference by search-
ing one step (typically a sentence) at a time [26–34]. Primarily for math tasks, it aims to improve
single-answer quality, making it orthogonal to our multiple-answer generation approach.
Inference-Time Scaling by Multiple Answer Generation. Since the community has come to
appreciate the power of inference-time scaling, the strategy that has been studied widely is repeated
sampling, in which the model generates many candidate answers and selects the best one [1–3,
35]. Although empirically strong and widely used, repeated sampling leaves obvious room for
improvement because it does not refine its candidates using external feedback [4, 5]. Before the era of
large-scale inference-time compute, a variety of task-specific strategies were proposed for relatively
small scales; examples include tree expansions directed by LLMs [6] and Bayesian methods [7].
LATS [9], RAP [15], SWE-Search [10], and RepoUnderstander [11] combine LLMs with MCTS,
primarily targeting sequential decision making. In this context, nodes represent states and edges
represent actions, which may involve interaction with an environment. LATS utilizes API calls and
code execution as actions to solve tasks. RAP addresses the process of solving block-moving puzzles
and mathematical word problems step-by-step. SWE-Search explores sequences of actions such as
searching, editing, and running tests to resolve issues within a software repository. RepoUnderstander
employs MCTS for exploration on a repository knowledge graph. The application of LATS to
coding tasks [9, Section 5.2] aligns with the context of multiple-answer generation in this paper and
corresponds to what we refer to as “standard MCTS” in our experiments.
Progressive Widening in MCTS. Progressive widening (PW) [36, 37] is a classic technique that
gradually increases actions considered per node. It was designed for games with unique actions
and no side information for untried moves, relying on visit-count heuristics. Complementary to PW,
Sokota et al. [38] propose “abstraction refining”, which groups similar successors using a decreasing
similarity threshold and shows advantages over PW under equal simulation budgets in stochastic
domains. Our approach differs as new branches are sampled from the same LLM. This homogeneity
in generation allows a principled statistical rule for choosing between widening and deepening.
3
Method
3.1
Preliminaries
First, we introduce the setup and notation, with detailed elaboration provided in Appendix A.1. We
consider a setting where an LLM, represented by a function fLLM, receives a textual prompt tin
containing (1) task instructions with optional few-shot examples, and/or (2) previously generated
outputs along with external feedback, and generates an answer tout = fLLM(tin). A scoring function
R then evaluates an answer tout to produce a score r = R(tout), where higher scores indicate better
performance. We typically assume that the score r is normalized to the range [0, 1], but our framework
allows for arbitrary ranges as well. Our goal is to find an output tout that attains a high score r under
limited calls to the LLM at inference time. Such tasks arise, for example, in code generation, where
the correctness or quality of the output can be quantified; for instance, R may execute the generated
code and return the fraction of test cases passed. In some cases, the true score evaluator may be
inaccessible (e.g., hidden test cases), so we assume we have access to some surrogate or partial
evaluator R, such as a public test evaluator, during the search. We aim to leverage this evaluator to
guide an efficient search for better solutions.
3.2
Adaptive Branching MCTS
MCTS for LLM-based Answer Generation. We perform the answer search by constructing a
search tree T, in which each non-root node N is associated with an LLM-generated answer to a given
task. Our goal is to construct T so that it contains answers with scores as high as possible.
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
AB-MCTS-M Example Tree
a0
a1
a2
a3
N
r = 0.8
r = 0
r = 0.2
GEN
r = 0.8
r = 0.3
GEN
GEN
GEN
r = 1.0
Posterior Predictive Distribution
a0
a1
a2
a3
0.0
0.5
1.0
N1
Tsub(N1)
Tsub(N2)
Tsub(N3)
N2
N3
r
Figure 2: Example tree structure and score posterior predictive distributions for AB-MCTS with
mixed models (AB-MCTS-M). Here, a1 leads to a set of child nodes with higher scores, causing a
peak at larger r. As more child samples are collected, the variance of the distribution decreases.
Algorithm 1 Adaptive Branching MCTS
1: function AB-MCTS(nnodes)
2:
T ←INITIALIZETREE( )
3:
for n = 1, . . . , nnodes do
4:
N ←SELECTEXPANSIONTARGET(T)
▷Step 1. Select an expansion target
5:
Nnew ←EXPAND(N, T)
▷Step 2. Expand the selected node to generate a child
6:
SCOREBACKUP(Nnew, T)
▷Step 3. Backup the score from the generated node
7:
return SELECTBEST(T)
8: function SELECTEXPANSIONTARGET(T)
9:
N ←GETROOT(T)
10:
while not ISLEAF(N) do
11:
Nnext ←SELECTCHILD(N, T)
▷Detailed in Sections 3.3 and 3.4
12:
if ISGENNODE(Nnext) then
▷If a GEN node is selected, branch off from the node
13:
break
14:
N ←Nnext
15:
return N
For this purpose, we employ MCTS, formulated iteratively as follows. Starting from a single root
node, we perform nnodes iterations, each adding one new node, resulting in a total of 1 + nnodes nodes.
Each iteration has three steps: (1) Selection, where we select a node N for expansion; (2) Expansion,
where we expand N by generating a new answer from node N, creating a new child node Nnew
and appending it to N. Specifically, if N is the root, the new answer is directly generated from the
task prompt; if N is non-root, the new answer refines the answer associated with N, using external
feedback; and (3) Score backup, where we propagate the score of Nnew up toward the root of the
tree T. We adopt different backup rules in our proposed methods (see Section 3.3 and 3.4). In our
setting, no separate rollout is needed, since each node’s score r can be evaluated directly once an
output is generated. After nnodes iterations, we select the best node based on a chosen criterion.
In standard MCTS, only leaf nodes are selected and expanded, (i.e., each node is expanded at most
once), and the expansion adds a fixed number of child nodes. However, since each query to an LLM
at non-zero temperature can yield different outputs from the same prompt, the branching factor is
theoretically infinite. To accommodate such unbounded branching, we relax the standard MCTS
constraints and allow selection and expansion of non-leaf nodes. Moreover, recent studies [3] suggest
that drawing many outputs from the same prompt at non-zero temperature can improve performance.
Allowing unbounded branching enables us to fully exploit these varied samples, whereas restricting
the branching factor could miss correct answer generations and undermine overall performance.
Adaptive Branching via the GEN Node. To fully leverage the potential performance improvement
from unbounded branching, we allow nodes that have already been expanded once to be expanded
again and further branched, unlike in standard MCTS. To explicitly represent the action of generating
new child nodes, we introduce a GEN node. Every node N (including newly expanded ones during
iterations) has a GEN node as a child. When the GEN node with parent node N is selected during the
selection step, we expand N by adding a new child node. Algorithm 1 outlines this approach, called
Adaptive Branching Monte Carlo Tree Search (AB-MCTS).
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
The only remaining component we need is a selection policy, including when to select a GEN
node. We propose two algorithms with different selection policies: AB-MCTS-M (Mixed model)
and AB-MCTS-A (node Aggregation). Both follow the overall procedure in Algorithm 1 and use
Thompson sampling to balance exploration and exploitation.
The UCT score is inapplicable to our AB-MCTS because GEN nodes make the problem fundamentally
different from a standard multi-armed bandit problem, for which UCT was designed. In standard
MCTS, the arms (branches) are static. In contrast, the GEN node in AB-MCTS dynamically generates
new arms. This special problem setting, where arms are generated on the fly, prevents the direct
application of UCT. We, therefore, adopt a Bayesian probabilistic model. This enables Thompson
sampling based on the posterior distribution and obviates the need for complex UCB-style confidence
bound analysis.
Thompson Sampling for Node Selection. In our proposed methods, we employ a Bayesian approach
with Thompson sampling for node selection. Here, we employ Thompson sampling because GEN
nodes do not have child nodes, making it impossible to compute their UCT scores. In addition,
Thompson sampling has the advantage of allowing node expansion in parallel. This is particularly
beneficial when evaluating node scores is time-consuming, as in the case of MLE-Bench (See
Appendix B.1 for MLE-Bench details).
Concretely, during SelectChild step at line 11 of Algorithm 1, we employ Thompson sampling
to decide between expanding a GEN node or selecting from existing child nodes at node N. Let N
be a node with potential actions
AN = {a0, a1, . . . , anchild},
where the action a0 corresponds to choosing the GEN node, and a1, . . . , anchild correspond to
choosing the already-existing child nodes. Suppose PN(r | ai) is the posterior predictive distribution
of the score r for an eventually expanded new node (Nnew at line 5 of Algorithm 1) if we choose the
action ai at node N. Then Thompson sampling proceeds by,
1. Calculate PN(r | aj) for each action aj at node N.
2. Draw scores rNnew,aj from PN(r | aj) for each action aj.
3. Select ˆa = arg maxaj∈AN rNnew,aj.
This three-step process corresponds to a single call to SelectChild.
A key question is how to perform step 1, i.e., how to model and calculate PN(r | aj) for all aj, in
particular for j = 0 (i.e., GEN node). We address this with two strategies: a mixed Bayesian model
(AB-MCTS-M) and a node aggregation method (AB-MCTS-A). In both cases, we model the score
probability distributions by Bayesian posterior predictives, but with different statistical models.
3.3
AB-MCTS-M: Adaptive Branching MCTS with Mixed Model
To model PN(r | aj), we employ a node-specific mixed model fitted individually at each node N.
That is, we fit a separate model for each N every time SelectChild in Algorithm 1 is invoked.
Denoting rNnew,aj ∼PN(r | aj) as a score of an eventually expanded node Nnew if we choose an
action aj at N, our mixed model is given as:
rNnew,aj = αj + σyϵNnew,
αj = µα + σαϵj,
ϵNnew ∼N(0, 1),
ϵj ∼N(0, 1),
(1)
Here, αj is a “group-level” intercept capturing the quality of the base solution at Nj, while σyϵNnew
represents per-instance noise. To fit this model, we place priors on the hyperparameters (µα, σα, σy)
and employ Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) to sample from their posterior distribution. The
GEN node (action a0) is treated as a newly introduced group without its own direct observations.
However, its group-level intercept α0 is inferred not from the prior alone but rather from the posterior
distribution over µα and σα, which is informed by the other observed data. We assume that even
after multiple refinement stages, the quality associated with the answer at node Nj continues to be
captured by this shared parameter (see Appendix A.3.2 for further details).
Algorithm Outline. To model PN(r | aj), AB-MCTS-M assigns each subtree under Nj, denoted
as Tsub(Nj), as a distinct group j (see Figure 2 for example subtree). The mixed model leverages
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
observed scores from these groups to compute the posterior predictive distributions of expected scores
for new nodes generated from each group (See Figure 2 for a schematic illustration). We sample the
scores from all the groups (the GEN node and Tsub(Nj)) using calculated posterior predictives. If
the GEN node’s sampled score is highest, we call fLLM to generate a new child node. Otherwise, we
choose the child node Nj with the highest score and continue the sampling step.
Score Backup Mechanism. When a new node N is created, its observed score is added to the
histories of N and its ancestors. This cumulative record is used to update the posterior distributions
in the mixed model. The observed score is not backed up to a GEN node, but it indirectly influences
the GEN node’s score probability distribution through the shared parameters in the mixed model (see
Appendix A.5 for a detailed walkthrough).
3.4
AB-MCTS-A: Adaptive Branching MCTS with Node Aggregation
In AB-MCTS-M, during the selection step at N, we use a mixed model that shares statistical strength
across groups through the shared model parameters. In contrast, AB-MCTS-A is designed in the
same spirit as the standard UCT-based MCTS, and there are no shared model parameters among the
different actions. This design simplifies the statistical modeling and makes the computation more
lightweight compared to AB-MCTS-M.
The major problem is how to back up scores to GEN nodes. Since the generated node is not attached
as a child to a GEN node, it makes the backup of scores difficult to define. Here, we introduce
a CONT node at the same tree level as all the GEN nodes (see Figure 3). Intuitively, the CONT
node represents the action of continuing refinement from the current answer at node N, rather than
generating a new node. By explicitly separating these two actions–generating new answers (GEN)
and refining existing answers (CONT)–we create a clear path for score propagation. Specifically, the
score of the expanded node is first backed up to the GEN node, and since all ancestors of the GEN
node are either nodes with LLM answers or CONT nodes, the score subsequently does not propagate
through other GEN nodes (see Figure 3 for an example tree).
AB-MCTS-A Example Tree
a0
a1 a2
a3
r = 0.8
r = 0.8
r = 0
r = 0.2
r = 0.3
N
GEN
CONT
GEN
GEN
CONT
GEN
CONT
r = 1.0
Figure 3: Example tree structure for AB-MCTS-
A. All child nodes are aggregated under a CONT
node, and a GEN node doesn’t have child nodes.
Algorithm Outline. AB-MCTS-A aggregates
all child nodes under a single CONT node,
which represents refinements from existing child
nodes (see Figure 3). We model each node’s
score probability in a Bayesian framework and
perform Thompson sampling on posterior pre-
dictives to decide between generating a new
child (GEN) or refining an existing one (CONT).
In contrast to AB-MCTS-M, we do not use
shared parameters among different node proba-
bility distributions.
To model PN(r | aj), we utilize exponential
family distributions with conjugate priors, en-
abling analytical and efficient posterior updates.
We employ two variants:
1. AB-MCTS-A (Gaussian), using a normal-inverse-χ2 prior for unbounded scores: PN(r |
aj) = p(r | {rk}K
k=1) = N(r | ˆm, σ2
ˆκ )χ−2(σ2 | ˆν, ˆτ 2), and
2. AB-MCTS-A (Beta), using a Beta prior for scores in [0, 1]: PN(r | aj) = p(r | {rk}K
k=1) =
B(r | ˆα, ˆβ),
where rk represents the scores backed up to the node Nj (GEN node, CONT node or LLM-generated
child nodes; see Figure 3 for example tree), where ˆm, ˆκ, ˆν, ˆτ, ˆα, ˆβ are determined from observed
scores rk and updated as these scores are backed up. The detailed parameter update rules are given in
Appendix A.4.
Score Backup Mechanism. During score-backup operations, the expanded node score is backed
up to the GEN node which led to the expansion of that node and the GEN node’s ancestors (see
Appendix A.5 for a detailed walkthrough). As we can see from Figure 3, a GEN node’s ancestors
include only generated nodes and CONT nodes, so the score is backed up to a GEN node only from
6

=== PAGE 7 ===
Table 1: Performance of AB-MCTS against baselines across benchmarks and models. This table
compares AB-MCTS with the baseline methods. Evaluations were performed on LiveCodeBench,
CodeContest, and ARC-AGI using GPT-4o and DeepSeek-V3 with a maximum generation budget
(27). Each entry provides a performance score (higher values are better) and its corresponding rank
(in parentheses, 1st is best). The “Avg. Rank” column shows the average rank across all settings.
LiveCodeBench
CodeContest
ARC-AGI
Method
GPT-4o
DeepSeek-V3
GPT-4o
DeepSeek-V3
GPT-4o
DeepSeek-V3 Avg.
Rank
Repeated Sampling
37.8 ± 0.5 (4) 40.7 ± 1.9 (6) 37.9 ± 0.3 (4) 43.2 ± 0.9 (5) 15.0 ± 1.0 (1) 18.6 ± 1.0 (1)
3.5
Sequential Refinement 37.8 ± 2.4 (4) 41.6 ± 0.6 (5) 30.1 ± 0.3 (6) 41.6 ± 0.9 (6) 8.7 ± 0.9 (6) 10.0 ± 0.6 (6)
5.5
Standard MCTS
36.7 ± 1.0 (6) 43.2 ± 2.1 (1) 37.5 ± 0.0 (5) 43.8 ± 0.9 (3) 9.0 ± 1.5 (5) 14.0 ± 1.5 (5)
4.2
AB-MCTS-M
38.9 ± 1.9 (2) 43.0 ± 1.5 (2) 40.6 ± 1.0 (1) 44.6 ± 0.9 (2) 12.3 ± 1.2 (4) 16.0 ± 1.0 (3)
2.3
AB-MCTS-A (Gaussian) 39.1 ± 1.9 (1) 42.5 ± 1.5 (3) 40.2 ± 1.7 (3) 43.4 ± 0.9 (4) 13.0 ± 3.6 (3) 18.3 ± 0.6 (2)
2.7
AB-MCTS-A (Beta)
38.7 ± 1.2 (3) 42.3 ± 0.8 (4) 40.4 ± 0.3 (2) 44.8 ± 0.6 (1) 14.0 ± 2.1 (2) 16.6 ± 0.6 (4)
2.7
the node that is created by choosing that GEN node. The backed-up score is used to update prior
probability distribution parameters.
4
Experiments
4.1
Experimental Setup
Benchmarks. We evaluated AB-MCTS on four diverse benchmarks that require complex problem-
solving: LiveCodeBench [14], CodeContest [1], ARC-AGI [17], and MLE-Bench [16]. Live-
CodeBench and CodeContest consist of competitive programming problems that demand mathe-
matical and algorithmic reasoning. ARC-AGI involves abstracting a common transformation rule
from visual patterns and implementing it as code. MLE-Bench, derived from Kaggle competitions,
involves constructing and optimizing machine learning models to achieve high scores based on the
evaluation metrics of each competition. For all these benchmarks, LLMs generate Python code to
solve each task, and external feedback (e.g., test case results, validation scores) is available to guide
the search. More details on the benchmarks can be found in Appendix B.1.
Models. We perform our experiments using GPT-4o (gpt-4o-2024-08-06) [18], and DeepSeek-
V3 (deepseek-chat) [19]. Each LLM generates a complete solution in a single API call. We
define the generation budget as the maximum number of API calls and set it to 27 = 128. The
temperature was set to 0.6 for GPT-4o following [3] and 1.0 for DeepSeek-V3 following the official
documentation.
Baselines. We benchmark AB-MCTS against three representative approaches. (1) Repeated Sam-
pling (Best-of-n) [1, 3, 39] independently generates up to n candidate solutions from a single LLM
prompt, a simple yet competitive baseline for coding tasks. (2) Sequential Refinement [4] iteratively
improves each solution by re-prompting the LLM with its own output and feedback. (3) Standard
MCTS follows the configuration from LATS [9, Section 5.2] (See also Appendix C.8). Each ex-
pansion adds five child nodes, and the search proceeds until it reaches the 27 nodes, with the final
expansion creating only three nodes to meet this limit precisely. Hyper-parameters for AB-MCTS are
summarized in Appendix B.2.
4.2
Results
Table 2: Performance on MLE-Bench tasks. AB-MCTS-M
demonstrates robust performance, achieving the best average
rank across diverse ML tasks.
Method
Nomad2018
Spooky.
Pizza.
Avg.
Repeated Sampling
0.065 (3)
0.47 (4)
0.72 (2)
3.0
Sequential Refinement
0.059 (1)
0.46 (3)
0.62 (3)
2.3
Standard MCTS
0.076 (4)
0.45 (2)
0.60 (4)
3.3
AB-MCTS-M
0.060 (2)
0.38 (1)
0.72 (1)
1.3
As detailed in Tables 1 and 2, our
comprehensive evaluations reveal AB-
MCTS as a consistently superior ap-
proach across diverse benchmarks and
LLMs, achieving the top average rank
and outperforming established base-
lines. This consistent success stems
from the distinctive ability of AB-
7

=== PAGE 8 ===
Standard MCTS
Sequential Refinement
Repeated Sampling
AB−MCTS−A (Gaussian)
AB−MCTS−A (Beta)
AB−MCTS−M
CodeContest
(higher is better)
ARC-AGI
(higher is better)
LiveCodeBench
(higher is better)
Figure 4: Performance comparison on LiveCodeBench, CodeContest, and ARC-AGI. We
compare the six methods using GPT-4o by plotting the success rate against the generation budget.
The inset plots provide a detailed view of performance at a maximum generation budget (27); the
mean success rate, its 95% confidence interval, and the results from the individual runs are shown.
Variance at a generation budget of 20 arises from conducting each experiment independently with
nonzero temperature. See Figure 6 for experiments on ARC-AGI with a larger budget.
Standard MCTS
Sequential Refinement
Repeated Sampling
AB−MCTS−A (Gaussian)
AB−MCTS−A (Beta)
AB−MCTS−M
CodeContest
(higher is better)
ARC-AGI
(higher is better)
LiveCodeBench
(higher is better)
Figure 5: Comparing algorithms by search tree shape and performance. Each point shows the
performance against the average tree shape for a given algorithm at a specific generation budget. The
x-axis represents the log-ratio of mean depth to mean width. Mean width is the average number of
nodes per depth. Larger and smaller x-axis values indicate deeper and wider searches, respectively.
MCTS to dynamically adapt its search strategy by precisely balancing exploration and exploitation to
the varying demands of each problem, an adaptability largely absent in baseline methods. We next
detail these results by benchmark, followed by an analysis of the search behavior of AB-MCTS.
LiveCodeBench and CodeContest. Figure 4 (left and center) reports the success rate (Pass@1) ver-
sus the generation budget for GPT-4o on LiveCodeBench and CodeContest. As expected, all methods
demonstrate improved performance with increasing computational budget. On both benchmarks,
AB-MCTS algorithms generally outperform the baseline methods. Notably, on LiveCodeBench
(Figure 4 left), AB-MCTS starts to pull ahead of the baselines even with a small budget of 23. On
CodeContest (Figure 4 center), AB-MCTS demonstrates superior performance compared to baselines
at larger budgets of 25 and beyond. Appendix Figure 8 shows that while standard MCTS performs
relatively well with DeepSeek-V3 compared to GPT-4o, our proposed methods achieve a comparable
success rate on LiveCodeBench and surpass standard MCTS on CodeContest.
ARC-AGI. Figure 4 (right) shows the performance on ARC-AGI, a particularly challenging bench-
mark. Following ARC-AGI’s official evaluation protocol, we report Pass@2 (Pass@1 is also reported
in Appendix C.6). Consistent with previous work [13], repeated sampling proves to be a strong
baseline in our setup, indicating the importance of broad exploration for this task. While standard
8

=== PAGE 9 ===
Root
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
125
126
127
128
Random Acts of Pizza: AB-MCTS-M
0.68
0.70
0.72
0.74
0.76
0.78
Figure 7: Example search tree generated by AB-MCTS-M on Random Acts of Pizza (MLE-
Bench). The figure shows how AB-MCTS-M dynamically balances exploration and exploitation.
Each node represents a solution. Nodes are colored according to their evaluation score used as the
search signal for AB-MCTS-M. The number inside each node indicates the order of generation. Grey
nodes mark candidates whose code failed to execute and therefore received no score.
MCTS yields only marginal improvements with larger budgets, our AB-MCTS framework achieves
performance comparable to repeated sampling. This suggests AB-MCTS’s capability to effectively
explore potentially by dynamically widening its search when beneficial. Similar results were observed
with DeepSeek-V3, as detailed in Appendix Figure 8.
MLE-Bench. Table 2 and Appendix Figure 10 present the performance on three competitions from
MLE-Bench using GPT-4o. Since MLE-Bench requires substantial GPU resources for training
and evaluating machine learning models, we exclusively used GPT-4o and focused on the baseline
methods and AB-MCTS-M (see also Appendix B.1). The best-performing baseline method varies
across competitions. This again highlights that different tasks benefit from different exploration-
exploitation trade-offs. In contrast, AB-MCTS-M consistently delivers strong performance in these
tasks. This consistent success across diverse competitions underscores AB-MCTS-M’s inherent
strength in effectively adapting its search strategy to varying problem structures.
4.3
Analysis
Standard MCTS
Sequential Refinement
Repeated Sampling
AB−MCTS−A (Gaussian)
AB−MCTS−A (Beta)
AB−MCTS−M
Figure 6: Performance comparison on ARC-
AGI with increased budget. Scalability of AB-
MCTS was assessed with a generation budget ex-
tended up to 512. Plotted points represent moving
averages to clarify performance trends.
Analysis of Search Behavior:
Width vs.
Depth.
To quantitatively analyze how AB-
MCTS balances exploration and exploitation,
we examined the average depth and the average
width at each depth of the generated search trees.
Figure 5 shows that AB-MCTS methods tend
to generate wider trees compared to standard
MCTS. This occurs because AB-MCTS can
adaptively decide to explore wider (select the
GEN node) from any existing node, unlike stan-
dard MCTS. This mechanism allows for more
flexible exploration across various tree depths
(See also Appendix C.7). In addition to this
flexibility in exploring wider, as seen in Table 2,
AB-MCTS also achieves strong performance on
benchmarks where sequential refinement excels,
suggesting that AB-MCTS effectively identifies
and exploits promising branches by selecting
existing child nodes for refinement. This adap-
tive nature allows it to combine the strengths of exploration and exploitation, resulting in robust
performance across diverse benchmarks.
Scaling with Increased Budget. Highly complex problems often require a substantial generation
budget to find a correct solution. ARC-AGI is a prime example, where extensive exploration via
repeated sampling is known to improve performance even at large budgets as reported in [13]. To
investigate the scaling properties of our approach, we extended the experiments on ARC-AGI using
DeepSeek-V3 with a larger generation budget up to 29 = 512. As shown in Figure 6, the performance
9

=== PAGE 10 ===
of AB-MCTS continues to improve substantially as the budget increases from 200 to 500, while
the improvement rate of repeated sampling begins to plateau. Standard MCTS also continues to
improve with a larger budget, yet shows a significantly lower success rate compared to the AB-MCTS
methods. This performance gap highlights that AB-MCTS is more effective at directing its search
towards promising branches within the search tree at large computational scales.
Qualitative Analysis of the Search Trees. Figure 7 and Appendix Figure 11 present example search
trees generated by AB-MCTS-M and standard MCTS. These visualizations illustrate more adaptive
branching by AB-MCTS-M compared to standard MCTS. This adaptive nature reveals that AB-
MCTS-M flexibly balances exploration and exploitation throughout the search process, dynamically
allocating budget to explore diverse new candidates (“going wider”) and refine promising ones
(“going deeper”). Further discussion can be found in Appendix C.3.
Efficiency and Performance against Repeated Sampling. While repeated sampling benefits from
potential efficiencies such as parallel sampling and no feedback computation costs, our results
demonstrate the significant advantages of AB-MCTS. On ARC-AGI, where repeated sampling is
notably strong, AB-MCTS not only continues to improve with increased budget but also ultimately
achieves performance levels that repeated sampling cannot reach (Figure 6). Furthermore, on
LiveCodeBench and CodeContest, AB-MCTS variants can reach the peak performance of repeated
sampling substantially earlier in many cases (Figure 4, Appendix Figure 8). This indicates that
even when accounting for the inherent advantages of repeated sampling, AB-MCTS emerges as a
promising approach to efficiently use the generation budget to achieve superior results in diverse
scenarios.
5
Conclusions
This paper introduced Adaptive Branching Monte Carlo Tree Search (AB-MCTS), a novel inference-
time framework to enhance LLM performance on complex tasks by effectively integrating multi-turn
exploration and exploitation. Unlike previous methods, AB-MCTS dynamically decides to “go wider”
or “go deeper” based on external feedback, leveraging Bayesian decision-making. Our experimental
results show AB-MCTS outperforms repeated sampling and standard MCTS, demonstrating the value
of adaptively handling the challenge of unbounded branching for effective inference-time scaling.
Limitations. Our approach assumes the existence of a reliable score evaluator, but developing
such an evaluator itself can be challenging depending on the task. Future work could also explore
search strategies that incorporate more fine-grained real-world cost factors beyond API call counts,
potentially enhancing the practical utility of AB-MCTS. We believe that addressing these challenges
will further enhance the applicability of AB-MCTS across a wider range of problems.
Author Contributions
Kou Misaki co-designed AB-MCTS and implemented its algorithm and core experimental code.
Yuichi Inoue designed and led the experiments, proposed and conducted the experimental analysis,
and co-led experimental code development. Yuki Imajuku conducted the CodeContest and Live-
CodeBench experiments and co-led experimental code development. So Kuroki implemented and
conducted the MLE-Bench experiments. Taishi Nakamura conducted the ARC-AGI experiments.
Takuya Akiba initiated the project, co-designed AB-MCTS, advised on experimental code design,
and provided overall supervision. All authors contributed to experimental code development, results
interpretation, and manuscript refinement.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Edoardo Cetin, Luke Darlow, Taro Makino, Kosuke Nakago, Makoto
Shing, and Yutaro Yamada for helpful feedback on an earlier version of the draft.
References
[1] Yujia Li, David Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kushman, Julian Schrittwieser, Rémi Leblond,
Tom Eccles, James Keeling, Felix Gimeno, Agustin Dal Lago, et al. Competition-level code
10

=== PAGE 11 ===
generation with alphacode. Science, 378(6624):1092–1097, 2022.
[2] Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V Le, Ed H. Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha
Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language
models. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
[3] Bradley Brown, Jordan Juravsky, Ryan Ehrlich, Ronald Clark, Quoc V Le, Christopher Ré,
and Azalia Mirhoseini. Large language monkeys: Scaling inference compute with repeated
sampling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21787, 2024.
[4] Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri
Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, et al. Self-refine: Iterative refinement
with self-feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
[5] Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao.
Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2024.
[6] Jierui Li, Hung Le, Yingbo Zhou, Caiming Xiong, Silvio Savarese, and Doyen Sahoo. CodeTree:
Agent-guided tree search for code generation with large language models. In Proceedings of the
2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 3711–3726, 2025.
[7] Hao Tang, Keya Hu, Jin Peng Zhou, Si Cheng Zhong, Wei-Long Zheng, Xujie Si, and Kevin
Ellis. Code repair with LLMs gives an exploration-exploitation tradeoff. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2024.
[8] Kuang-Huei Lee, Ian Fischer, Yueh-Hua Wu, Dave Marwood, Shumeet Baluja, Dale Schu-
urmans, and Xinyun Chen. Evolving deeper llm thinking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.09891,
2025.
[9] Andy Zhou, Kai Yan, Michal Shlapentokh-Rothman, Haohan Wang, and Yu-Xiong Wang.
Language agent tree search unifies reasoning, acting, and planning in language models. In
International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
[10] Antonis Antoniades, Albert Örwall, Kexun Zhang, Yuxi Xie, Anirudh Goyal, and William Yang
Wang. SWE-search: Enhancing software agents with monte carlo tree search and iterative
refinement. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.
[11] Yingwei Ma, Qingping Yang, Rongyu Cao, Binhua Li, Fei Huang, and Yongbin Li. How to
understand whole software repository? arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.01422, 2024.
[12] Zhenwen Liang, Ye Liu, Tong Niu, Xiangliang Zhang, Yingbo Zhou, and Semih Yavuz. Im-
proving llm reasoning through scaling inference computation with collaborative verification.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.05318, 2024.
[13] Ryan
Greenblatt.
Getting
50%
(sota)
on
arc-agi
with
gpt-4o.
https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/Rdwui3wHxCeKb7feK/
getting-50-sota-on-arc-agi-with-gpt-4o, 2024.
Accessed:
January 21,
2025.
[14] Naman Jain, King Han, Alex Gu, Wen-Ding Li, Fanjia Yan, Tianjun Zhang, Sida Wang, Ar-
mando Solar-Lezama, Koushik Sen, and Ion Stoica. Livecodebench: Holistic and contamination
free evaluation of large language models for code. In International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2025.
[15] Shibo Hao, Yi Gu, Haodi Ma, Joshua Hong, Zhen Wang, Daisy Wang, and Zhiting Hu. Rea-
soning with language model is planning with world model. In Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 8154–8173, 2023.
[16] Jun Shern Chan, Neil Chowdhury, Oliver Jaffe, James Aung, Dane Sherburn, Evan Mays,
Giulio Starace, Kevin Liu, Leon Maksin, Tejal Patwardhan, Aleksander Madry, and Lilian
Weng. MLE-bench: Evaluating machine learning agents on machine learning engineering. In
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.
11

=== PAGE 12 ===
[17] François Chollet. On the measure of intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.01547, 2019.
[18] OpenAI. Gpt-4o system card. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.21276, 2024.
[19] DeepSeek-AI. Deepseek-v3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.19437, 2024.
[20] OpenAI. Openai o1 system card. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.16720, 2024.
[21] OpenAI.
Competitive programming with large reasoning models.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.06807, 2025.
[22] DeepSeek-AI. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948, 2025.
[23] Yixin Ye, Zhen Huang, Yang Xiao, Ethan Chern, Shijie Xia, and Pengfei Liu. Limo: Less is
more for reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.03387, 2025.
[24] Niklas Muennighoff, Zitong Yang, Weijia Shi, Xiang Lisa Li, Li Fei-Fei, Hannaneh Hajishirzi,
Luke Zettlemoyer, Percy Liang, Emmanuel Candès, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. s1: Simple
test-time scaling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.19393, 2025.
[25] Kimi Team.
Kimi k1.5:
Scaling reinforcement learning with llms.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2501.12599, 2025.
[26] Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Tom Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik
Narasimhan. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.
[27] Charlie Victor Snell, Jaehoon Lee, Kelvin Xu, and Aviral Kumar. Scaling test-time compute
optimally can be more effective than scaling LLM parameters. In International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2025.
[28] Guoxin Chen, Minpeng Liao, Chengxi Li, and Kai Fan. Alphamath almost zero: Process
supervision without process. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.
[29] Bofei Gao, Feifan Song, Zhe Yang, Zefan Cai, Yibo Miao, Qingxiu Dong, Lei Li, Chenghao Ma,
Liang Chen, Runxin Xu, et al. Omni-MATH: A universal olympiad level mathematic benchmark
for large language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.
[30] Yu Zhao, Huifeng Yin, Bo Zeng, Hao Wang, Tianqi Shi, Chenyang Lyu, Longyue Wang, Weihua
Luo, and Kaifu Zhang. Marco-o1: Towards open reasoning models for open-ended solutions.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.14405, 2024.
[31] Zhenting Qi, Mingyuan MA, Jiahang Xu, Li Lyna Zhang, Fan Yang, and Mao Yang. Mutual
reasoning makes smaller LLMs stronger problem-solver. In International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2025.
[32] Xinyu Guan, Li Lyna Zhang, Yifei Liu, Ning Shang, Youran Sun, Yi Zhu, Fan Yang, and Mao
Yang. rstar-math: Small llms can master math reasoning with self-evolved deep thinking. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2501.04519, 2025.
[33] Yangzhen Wu, Zhiqing Sun, Shanda Li, Sean Welleck, and Yiming Yang. Inference scaling laws:
An empirical analysis of compute-optimal inference for LLM problem-solving. In International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.
[34] Dan Zhang, Sining Zhoubian, Ziniu Hu, Yisong Yue, Yuxiao Dong, and Jie Tang. ReST-MCTS*:
LLM self-training via process reward guided tree search. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2024.
[35] Rylan Schaeffer, Joshua Kazdan, John Hughes, Jordan Juravsky, Sara Price, Aengus Lynch, Erik
Jones, Robert Kirk, Azalia Mirhoseini, and Sanmi Koyejo. How do large language monkeys get
their power (laws)?, 2025.
[36] Rémi Coulom. Computing “elo ratings” of move patterns in the game of go. ICGA journal,
30(4):198–208, 2007.
12

=== PAGE 13 ===
[37] Adrien Couëtoux, Jean-Baptiste Hoock, Nataliya Sokolovska, Olivier Teytaud, and Nicolas
Bonnard. Continuous upper confidence trees. In Learning and Intelligent Optimization: 5th
International Conference, LION 5, Rome, Italy, January 17-21, 2011. Selected Papers 5, pages
433–445. Springer, 2011.
[38] Samuel Sokota, Caleb Y Ho, Zaheen Ahmad, and J. Zico Kolter. Monte carlo tree search with
iteratively refining state abstractions. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
volume 34, pages 18698–18709, 2021.
[39] Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee,
Jan Leike, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe. Let’s verify step by step. In
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
[40] An Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bofei Gao, Bowen Yu, Chengpeng Li, Dayiheng
Liu, Jianhong Tu, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, et al. Qwen2.5-math technical report: Toward
mathematical expert model via self-improvement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12122, 2024.
[41] Oriol Abril-Pla, Virgile Andreani, Colin Carroll, Larry Dong, Christopher J Fonnesbeck, Maxim
Kochurov, Ravin Kumar, Junpeng Lao, Christian C Luhmann, Osvaldo A Martin, et al. PyMC: A
modern, and comprehensive probabilistic programming framework in python. PeerJ Computer
Science, 9:e1516, 2023.
[42] Ruocheng Wang, Eric Zelikman, Gabriel Poesia, Yewen Pu, Nick Haber, and Noah Goodman.
Hypothesis search: Inductive reasoning with language models. In International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2024.
[43] Jianhao Chen, Zishuo Xun, Bocheng Zhou, Han Qi, Hangfan Zhang, Qiaosheng Zhang, Yang
Chen, Wei Hu, Yuzhong Qu, Wanli Ouyang, and Shuyue Hu. Do we truly need so many
samples? multi-llm repeated sampling efficiently scales test-time compute. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2501.12948, 2025.
[44] Francois Chollet, Mike Knoop, Gregory Kamradt, Bryan Landers, and Henry Pinkard. Arc-
agi-2: A new challenge for frontier ai reasoning systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.11831,
2025.
[45] Gemini Team.
Gemini 2.5: Pushing the frontier with advanced reasoning, multimodal-
ity, long context, and next generation agentic capabilities. Technical report, Google Deep-
Mind, jun 2025. URL https://storage.googleapis.com/deepmind-media/
gemini/gemini_v2_5_report.pdf. Technical report, accessed 26 Jun 2025.
[46] OpenAI.
OpenAI
o4-mini
System
Card.
https://openai.com/index/
o3-o4-mini-system-card/, apr 2025. Accessed 26 Jun 2025.
13

=== PAGE 14 ===
A
Method Details
A.1
Extended Preliminaries
A.1.1
Problem Setup
First, we define the problem setting and introduce the mathematical notation.
We consider problems where the input is a natural language prompt tin (which may include few-shot
examples, task instructions, etc.). Given tin, an LLM produces a natural language output tout, which
is then scored by a score evaluator to yield a final score r. We assume 0 ≤r ≤1, where higher
values of r correspond to better answers.
This two-stage pipeline can be expressed as:
r = R(tout) = R(fLLM(tin)),
(2)
where the function fLLM represents an LLM that generates the answer, and R is the score evaluator.
fLLM is stochastic and may produce different outputs tout for the same input tin. Here we allow tout
to include information beyond the direct answer (e.g., the reasoning steps), and we assume that R
properly performs the parsing of this answer to perform the score evaluation.
Our framework applies to any task whose final answer can be quantitatively scored, such as program-
ming tasks [1, 14], math problems [29], and machine learning competitions [16]. We assume the
score evaluator R is already defined in a task-specific manner, and our goal is to find tout that attains
as high an r as possible during the inference-time answer search.
In some tasks that mimic real competitions, the ground-truth score evaluator Rgt (reflecting the
correctness of the answer) is not accessible during the answer search stage. For example, in MLE-
Bench [16], the test dataset used for final evaluation is withheld, and in coding competition tasks
[1, 14], participants can often only submit their code a limited number of times to obtain the score on
hidden test cases. In such situations, to search for the best answer, one may resort to a different score
evaluator. For instance, in MLE-Bench, this could be the performance on a public dataset, while in
coding competitions, it might be the fraction of solved public test cases. For mathematical tasks, a
separately trained reward model [40] may be used. Throughout this work, we assume there is some
accessible score evaluator at the answer search stage that can assess the quality of tout.
A.1.2
Existing Methods for Inference-Time Answer Search
We now review two standard approaches that focus on exploration or exploitation alone.
Only Go Wide: Repeated Sampling. A straightforward approach to inference-time answer search is
to repeatedly sample an answer from the LLM with a nonzero temperature. We refer to each sampling
step as the direct answer generation process. By performing it n times,
tm
out = fLLM(tin),
m ∈{1, . . . , n},
(3)
we obtain multiple candidate answers. Then, one can select the best answer based on a predefined
criterion, such as the highest score r (best-of-n), majority voting, or self-consistency. Brown et al. [3]
recently showed that as n increases, the coverage of generated answers improves. A similar approach
was employed by AlphaCode [1] to achieve human-level performance on competitive programming
tasks.
Only Go Deep: Sequential Refinement. Alternatively, we can leverage the answer refinement
process and apply it sequentially to perform the answer search. We consider the situation where we
already let some answer generator solve the problem at hand k times, and collected the input-output
pairs tj
in and tj
out where j ∈{1, . . . , k} for those answer generations.
We define the answer refinement process as a two-step procedure: (1) creation of a new refinement
input from the existing input-output pairs, and (2) generation of a new answer tk+1
out from tk+1
in
.
Symbolically,
tk+1
out = fLLM(tk+1
in
) = fLLM

hrefine
 {tj
in, tj
out}j∈{1,...,k}

,
(4)
where hrefine is a refinement input generator that provides all the information necessary for refinement,
such as feedback on each answer (e.g., code execution results or errors for coding tasks).
14

=== PAGE 15 ===
Applying this refinement step iteratively yields n answers:
t1
in = tin,
(5)
t1
out = fLLM(t1
in),
(6)
tm
in = hrefine
 {tj
in, tj
out}j∈{1,...,m−1}

(7)
tm
out = fLLM(tm
in)
(8)
for m ∈{2, . . . , n}. Finally, one selects the best candidate among {ta
out}a∈{1,...,n} based on a chosen
criterion, similar to the repeated sampling approach.
We can regard the two methods above (pure exploration and pure exploitation) as special cases of a
tree search: the former expands only from the root node, while the latter continues from the most
recently reached leaf node on a single linear path, exploring it in depth without branching outward.
The standard MCTS naturally incorporates the two, while it uses a fixed branching factor, thereby
limiting the performance gain from the repeated sampling when using LLM. Our AB-MCTS employs
a more flexible branching algorithm and effectively leverages performance improvements obtained
by repeated sampling.
A.2
Comparison of AB-MCTS and Standard MCTS with Progressive Widening
The progressive widening has parameters (k, α) which bounds the number of branching factors by
knα with node visit count n. With these parameters, the rule for whether to branch is pre-determined
as a function of the node’s visit count. Crucially, this decision does not use important information
gathered during the search, namely, the observed rewards of the expanded nodes. The UCT score
is only used to select which child to descend to after the decision has been made not to branch.
Furthermore, defining the branching rule as a function of visit count means that the scaling behavior
of the tree’s shape and node degrees is pre-determined by the choice of hyperparameters.
In contrast, our approach does not restrict the branching rule based solely on visit counts and
hyperparameters. Instead, the branching factor adapts dynamically based on the observed rewards.
This is an important requirement for LLM test-time inference scaling, where a tree search that
purely goes wide is known to be a strong baseline. To demonstrate the robustness of AB-MCTS, we
conducted an experiment to compare AB-MCTS and progressive widening in Appendix C.4.
A.3
AB-MCTS-M Details
A.3.1
Background on Mixed Models
Mixed linear models are extensions of traditional linear models that explicitly model non-
independence among observations by incorporating both fixed and random effects. Fixed effects
capture consistent, predictable patterns across the entire population or dataset (e.g., treatment effects
common to all groups). In contrast, the random effects model variability arises within or between
specific nested or hierarchical groups (e.g., individual differences among participants, or variations
between schools).
A.3.2
Detailed Mixed Model Formulation and Example Code
In AB-MCTS-M, we fit a separate mixed model at each node N of the MCTS tree, that is, at each sub-
step within the MCTS selection step. Specifically, let Nj (j = 1, . . . , nchild) denote the direct child
nodes of N, and define Tsub(Nj) as the subtree under Nj, including Nj itself. For a newly generated
node ˜N where (i) j = 0 (i.e. for GEN node) and ˜N is a direct child of N, or (ii) j = 1, . . . , nchild
and ˜N is a node expanded from some node in Tsub(Nj) at that iteration step, we assume:
r ˜
N = αj + σyϵ ˜
N,
αj = µα + σαϵj,
(9)
ϵ ˜
N ∼N(0, 1),
ϵj ∼N(0, 1),
(10)
Here, αj is a “group-level” intercept capturing the quality of the base solution at Nj, while σyϵ ˜
N
represents per-instance noise. The GEN node (action a0) is treated as a newly introduced group
without its own direct observations. However, its group-level intercept α0 is inferred not from the
prior alone but rather from the posterior distribution over µα and σα, which is informed by the other
observed data.
15

=== PAGE 16 ===
import pymc as pm
# Child indices use 0-based indexing; note the difference from index j in
Equations (9-10)
child_indices = [0, 0, 0, 1, 2, 2]
rewards = [0.8, 0.8, 1.0, 0, 0.2, 0.3]
coords = {"child_idx": [0, 1, 2]}
with pm.Model(coords=coords) as model:
## Priors
mu_alpha = pm.Normal("mu_alpha", mu=0.5, sigma=0.2)
sigma_alpha = pm.HalfNormal("sigma_alpha", sigma=0.2)
sigma_y = pm.HalfNormal("sigma_y", sigma=0.3)
## Priors END
eps_j = pm.Normal("eps_j", mu=0, sigma=1, dims="child_idx")
alpha = mu_alpha + eps_j * sigma_alpha
r = pm.Normal("r", mu=alpha[child_indices], sigma=sigma_y, observed=
rewards)
Listing 1: AB-MCTS-M fitting model example code
eps_j_gen = pm.Normal("eps_j_gen", mu=0, sigma=1)
alpha_gen = mu_alpha + eps_j_gen * sigma_alpha
r_gen = pm.Normal("r_gen", mu=alpha_gen, sigma=sigma_y)
Listing 2: AB-MCTS-M GEN node reward modeling
We place priors on (µα, σα, σy) and estimate them via MCMC (Markov Chain Monte Carlo), then
perform Thompson Sampling. Because the GEN group (j = 0) has no direct observations, its
posterior remains more uncertain and thus encourages exploration. To illustrate how to estimate
posterior predictives, in Listing 1, we provide PyMC [41] code corresponding to the example tree
shown in Figure 2. Here, we adopted the same priors as in our experimental setting, as noted in
Appendix B.2:
µα ∼N(0.5, 0.22),
σα ∼Nhalf(0.22),
σy ∼Nhalf(0.32),
(11)
In this implementation, the variable alpha is node-specific (indexed by child_idx), yet shares
parameters mu_alpha, representing the overall average answer quality determined by the inherent
difficulty of the task, and sigma_alpha, representing the variability in answer quality arising from
the LLM’s response diversity. Differences in answer quality among nodes are captured by the variable
eps_j.
To compute the probability distribution for the GEN node, we introduce a slightly modified predictive
model by adding an additional variable representing the GEN node reward, as shown in Listing 2.
Since eps_j_gen has no associated observed data, r_gen typically exhibits higher variance com-
pared to r. Intuitively, r_gen incorporates both the variance arising from the refinement process and
the inherent variability in answer generation at node N. This increased variance encourages greater
exploration during Thompson Sampling.
After model fitting, the posterior predictive distributions of r (existing child nodes) and r_gen (GEN
node) are utilized for Thompson Sampling.
16

=== PAGE 17 ===
A.4
AB-MCTS-A Details: Parameter Update Rules
A.4.1
AB-MCTS-A (Gaussian) Parameter Update Rules
As for the parameter update rules, for the Gaussian case, we use a normal-inverse-χ2 prior:
p(r | {rn}N
n=1) = N(r | “m, σ2
“κ )χ−2(σ2 | “ν, “τ 2),
(12)
“m = ˘κ ˘m + N ¯r
“κ
,
(13)
“κ = ˘κ + N,
(14)
“ν = ˘ν + N,
(15)
“ν “τ 2 = ˘ν ˘τ 2 +
N
X
n=1
(rn −¯r)2 +
N ˘κ
˘κ + N ( “m −¯r)2,
(16)
¯r = 1
N
N
X
n=1
rn,
(17)
where rn is the observed score.
A.4.2
AB-MCTS-A (Beta) Parameter Update Rules
Alternatively, if r ∈[0, 1], we can use a Beta distribution with the following parameter update rules
after observing {rn}N
n=1:
p(r | {rn}N
n=1) = B(r | “α, “β),
(18)
“α = ˘α +
N
X
n=1
rn,
(19)
“β = ˘β +
N
X
n=1
(1 −rn),
(20)
where B(· | α, β) denotes the Beta distribution. We note that, usually this update rule is used in
conjunction with the Bernoulli trial, but here we directly use Beta distribution to model the score
distribution. In practice, this parameter update rule worked well according to our experimental results.
A.5
Walk-through Examples
We walk through an iteration of AB-MCTS-M and AB-MCTS-A on the example trees in Figures 2
and 3. The process is stochastic due to Thompson sampling; for clarity, we assume specific sampled
outcomes.
A.5.1
AB-MCTS-M
AB-MCTS-M incrementally builds the search tree by adding one node at a time. In this section, we
detail a single iteration of the AB-MCTS-M algorithm, clearly illustrating the sequence of selecting a
node to expand, performing the expansion, and backing up the resulting score. For simplicity and
concreteness, we assume the current search tree structure is as depicted in Figure 2, and we describe
one complete iteration, including selection, expansion, and score backup.
1. (N →N1) At N, we compute posterior distributions for its four children, GEN, N1, N2,
and N3 under the mixed model, and draw one score from each. If GEN receives the highest
sample it is expanded and its score is backed up (Algorithm 1, lines 11–13). Here, we
assume that N1 attains the highest sampled score, reflecting the exploitation of a child whose
posterior peak is comparatively large.
2. (N1 →N ′
1) N1 has two direct children, N ′
1 (r = 0.8) and N ′
2 (r = 1.0). We compute
posteriors for GEN, N ′
1, and N ′
2, then sample again. Although the subtree T(N ′
2) currently
contains nodes with higher score as we can see from Figure 2, the finite variance of its
posterior ensures that N ′
2 is not always selected, and encourages more exploration for
under-explored tree regions. Suppose N ′
1 is chosen on this iteration.
17

=== PAGE 18 ===
3. (Expanding N ′
1) Because N ′
1 is a leaf, we expand it (Algorithm 1, line 10). Assume the
newly generated node receives the score r = 0.5. Since all the leaf nodes have a GEN child,
a GEN node is appended to this expanded node as well.
4. (Score backup) The score is propagated upwards from the expanded node toward the
root, as in standard MCTS. In the current example, the score is backed up through the
node generated at step 3, then through nodes N ′
1, N1, and N. Unlike standard MCTS,
AB-MCTS-M maintains individual scores rather than averages. Specifically, the backed-up
scores for nodes N1, N2, N3 form distinct observation lists corresponding to each group
in the mixed model. Although GEN nodes have no direct observations due to this score
backup rule, their posterior distributions share statistical strength with these groups, allowing
indirect information sharing and improved estimation accuracy for a score obtained by node
expansion. At the next SelectExpansionTarget call, the four posteriors at N have
different shapes; specifically, the peak of N1’s posterior shifts left due to the lowered
expected value. Other posterior distributions are affected as well, e.g., the right-hand tail
of the GEN posterior contracts. Please note that, in AB-MCTS-M, the change of posterior
distribution shape cannot be analytically written down, and is calculated by MCMC. Thus,
unlike standard MCTS, the score backup step involves appending the new score to a list of
scores.
A.5.2
AB-MCTS-A
AB-MCTS-A works in a similar manner to AB-MCTS-M, except for the introduction of CONT node
and how we perform score backup. To clearly illustrate the algorithm and highlight the difference
from AB-MCTS-M, we describe a complete iteration of selection, expansion, and score backup cycle
for AB-MCTS-A. Since the only difference between Beta and Gaussian variants is how the score
update is reflected in the posterior distribution, here we focus on the qualitative aspect of posterior
update and focus on the details for an example tree, Figure 3.
1. (N →CONT) At the root, we sample from the posteriors of the GEN and CONT children.
As detailed in Section 3.4, the GEN posterior is informed by the CONT children nodes
N1 (0.8), N2 (0.0), N3 (0.2), whereas the CONT posterior uses the CONT node’s descen-
dant scores excluding N1, N2 and N3, i.e., 0.8, 1.0, 0.3. We assume CONT is selected
here.
2. (CONT →N1) Next we compute posteriors for CONT’s children N1, N2, and N3. Due to
the score-backup rule, the posterior distributions are computed from previously expanded
nodes; Concretely, the following scores are used for posterior distribution calculation: N1:
(0.8, 0.8, 1.0), N2: (0.0), and N3: (0.2, 0.3). Here, we assume N1 obtains the highest sample
via Thompson sampling.
3. (Expanding N1) Again, we perform Thompson sampling between the GEN and CONT
children of N1. The GEN posterior uses (0.8, 1.0); the CONT posterior falls back to the
prior because no generated descendants exist. Here we assume GEN is selected, leading to
the expansion of a new node under N1’s CONT child. We assume the score r = 0.5.
4. (Score backup) We backup the score r = 0.5 as prescribed in Section 3.4. First, the score
is backed up to the GEN node which generates the node. Second, it propagates to: (i) GEN
node’s ancestor N1, and (ii) the CONT node that is N1’s parent. Because 0.5 is lower than
the existing scores 0.8, 1.0, the posterior peak of N1 shifts left, reducing the probability that
N1 will be chosen again from CONT. Similarly, adding 0.5 to the existing scores (0.8, 1.0,
0.3) lowers the peak of the CONT posterior at N, thus decreasing the probability that CONT
will be selected at N in later iterations.
A.6
Hyperparameter Sensitivity of AB-MCTS
This section presents a sensitivity analysis of the hyperparameters used in AB-MCTS. As discussed
in Appendix B.2, the prior parameters were designed to be non-informative to minimize bias.
Since the posterior distributions become increasingly data-driven as the search progresses, we
hypothesized that the influence of the initial priors would be limited. Here, we empirically verify
this hypothesis through an extensive analysis. We evaluated the sensitivity of AB-MCTS variants
to their prior hyperparameters on LiveCodeBench, using GPT-4o with a generation budget of 24.
18

=== PAGE 19 ===
Table 3: Hyperparameter Sensitivity of AB-MCTS. Pass@1 results for each prior setting. All
values are averaged over five runs.
AB-MCTS-M
˘m
0.0
0.4
0.5
0.6
1.0
Pass@1
38.4 ± 1.6
37.3 ± 0.4
36.8 ± 1.5
37.5 ± 1.5
37.7 ± 1.3
˘α
0.01
0.1
0.2
0.3
1.0
Pass@1
38.4 ± 1.3
37.7 ± 0.9
36.8 ± 1.5
38.2 ± 2.3
38.6 ± 1.8
˘τ
0.01
0.1
0.2
0.3
1.0
Pass@1
37.3 ± 2.0
38.2 ± 1.1
37.1 ± 1.2
36.8 ± 1.5
39.5 ± 1.3
AB-MCTS-A (Gaussian)
˘m
0.0
0.1
0.5
1.0
Pass@1
38.0 ± 1.6
37.0 ± 1.4
37.3 ± 1.5
37.7 ± 0.7
˘κ
0.001
0.5
1.0
10.0
Pass@1
38.4 ± 1.3
37.3 ± 1.5
38.0 ± 1.6
37.7 ± 0.7
˘ν
0.001
0.5
1.0
10.0
Pass@1
38.2 ± 1.3
37.7 ± 1.3
38.0 ± 1.6
38.9 ± 1.0
˘τ 2
0.05
0.1
0.2
0.5
1.0
Pass@1
37.5 ± 0.9
38.0 ± 1.6
37.7 ± 1.3
37.9 ± 0.8
37.7 ± 0.7
AB-MCTS-A (Beta)
˘α
0.1
0.4
0.5
0.6
1.0
Pass@1
37.3 ± 1.5
37.0 ± 1.5
37.5 ± 1.3
37.5 ± 1.3
37.7 ± 1.2
˘β
0.1
0.4
0.5
0.6
1.0
Pass@1
38.4 ± 1.8
38.4 ± 1.1
37.5 ± 1.3
37.9 ± 0.5
37.9 ± 1.4
Each configuration was run five times (n = 5) to compute mean and standard deviation of Pass@1.
Tables 3 summarize the results for AB-MCTS-M, AB-MCTS-A (Gaussian), and AB-MCTS-A (Beta)
under various prior settings. Across all tested ranges, the performance remains stable, indicating
low sensitivity to the initial hyperparameter values. This confirms that AB-MCTS is robust to the
initialization of prior hyperparameters, and its performance is primarily governed by the data-driven
posterior updates during search.
B
Additional Experimental Details
B.1
Tasks and Datasets
We evaluated our approach on four benchmarks: CodeContest [1], LiveCodeBench [14], the Abstrac-
tion and Reasoning Corpus (ARC) [17], and MLE-Bench [16]. All of these benchmarks feature tasks
that are often solved via code generation. Each experiment was run multiple times using non-zero
temperature to account for stochasticity (n = 5 for LiveCodeBench, n = 3 for CodeContest and
ARC-AGI). For MLE-Bench, experiments were run with n = 1 due to the significant computational
cost.
CodeContest and LiveCodeBench are well-established competitive programming benchmarks, both
providing public tests and hidden tests. We use the public tests to calculate each node’s score and the
hidden tests for final evaluation. A solution is counted as correct only if it passes all hidden test cases
for a given problem, and the success rate is defined as the fraction of problems for which the chosen
solution is fully correct. The prompt templates we used are based on those from previous work [14].
19

=== PAGE 20 ===
In LiveCodeBench, we only use problems released between August and November 2024, aligning
with the previous work [19] to prevent data contamination.
ARC-AGI requires discovering a shared transformation rule from multiple input-output examples,
then using it to predict the output for a test input. Generating code from sample grids is a frequently
used approach for ARC [7, 13, 42]. We instruct the LLM to infer a transformation rule from the
provided input/output examples and generate corresponding Python code. Each node’s score is
determined by the fraction of examples it correctly transforms. The node that achieves the highest
score is then used to transform the test examples; if the output exactly matches the ground truth, that
node’s score is set to 1. We evaluate our method on the same set of 100 public evaluation problems
and prompts used in prior work [13].
MLE-Bench comprises practical machine learning tasks derived from Kaggle competitions. In
order to enable fair comparisons [16], we adopt three low-complexity challenges (Nomad2018
Predicting Transparent Conductors, Spooky Author Identification, and Random Acts of Pizza). Each
competition’s training data is randomly split into 80% for training and 20% for validation. The
validation set is used to obtain the scores for each node. We select a node with the highest validation
score at a given inference budget and then evaluate it on the hidden test set to get the final result.
Following previous research [16], we use the AIDE scaffold for our experiments. Evaluating the
generated machine learning models within these competitions is notably resource-intensive, requiring
substantial GPU power even to process a single solution candidate. In our experiments, each solution
candidate was executed on a single H100 GPU with a time limit of one hour. This computational
demand is still considerably higher than for other benchmarks discussed in this work. Consequently,
due to these significant costs, comprehensive experimentation across all methods and models on
MLE-Bench was prohibitive. We therefore focused our evaluations using GPT-4o for these tasks
specifically on AB-MCTS-M.
B.2
AB-MCTS Parameters
Due to its Bayesian nature, the hyperparameters of AB-MCTS consist only of prior parameters. We
used the same prior parameters for all the tasks without task-specific domain knowledge (except for the
range of the score being approximately [0, 1]), thereby minimizing any potential bias. Consequently,
our priors have the following shared properties:
• The vast majority of the probability mass (or all of it, in the case AB-MCTS-A (Beta)) is
within [0, 1].
• The average value of score is 0.5, reflecting a neutral initial assumption regarding answer
quality (where 0 indicates the worst and 1 the best)
• The probability mass does not concentrate excessively in any particular region, reflecting
our unbiased prior.
We assign the following priors for AB-MCTS-M in Equations 9 and 10:
µα ∼N(0.5, 0.22),
σα ∼Nhalf(0.22),
σy ∼Nhalf(0.32),
(21)
where Nhalf is the half-normal distribution (please refer to Section 3.3 and Appendix A.3). For
AB-MCTS-A (Gaussian), we set ˘m = 0, ˘κ = 1, ˘ν = 1, and ˘τ 2 = 0.1 in Equations 12 - 17, and for
AB-MCTS-A (Beta), we set ˘α = 0.5 and ˘β = 0.5 in Equations 18 - 20. As we noted earlier, we
chose these parameters in a way that imposes as few assumptions as possible to minimize bias.
We expect the dependency on specific initial prior parameter values to be minimal, largely due to
the substantial computational budgets in our evaluations and because posterior distributions become
increasingly data-dominated as the search tree expands with more score observations (up to 27
nodes in most of the experiments and 29 in the extended ARC-AGI experiments). Because our node
selection methods (AB-MCTS-M, with its mixed model, and AB-MCTS-A using conjugate priors)
are fundamentally Bayesian, the priors primarily influence the early stages of the search. Moreover,
the “borrowing strength” mechanism inherent in the mixed model stabilizes posterior estimates and
facilitates convergence. As the search progresses and score observations accumulate, the initial prior
influence naturally diminishes.
20

=== PAGE 21 ===
Standard MCTS
Sequential Refinement
Repeated Sampling
AB−MCTS−A (Gaussian)
AB−MCTS−A (Beta)
AB−MCTS−M
CodeContest
(higher is better)
ARC-AGI
(higher is better)
LiveCodeBench
(higher is better)
Figure 8: Performance comparison with DeepSeek-V3 on LiveCodeBench, CodeContest, and
ARC-AGI. We compare AB-MCTS methods with the baselines by plotting the success rate against
the generation budget.
Standard MCTS
Sequential Refinement
Repeated Sampling
AB−MCTS−A (Gaussian)
AB−MCTS−A (Beta)
AB−MCTS−M
CodeContest
(higher is better)
ARC-AGI
(higher is better)
LiveCodeBench
(higher is better)
Figure 9: Comparing algorithms by search tree shape and performance Each point shows the
performance against the average tree shape for a given algorithm at a specific generation budget. The
x-axis represents the log-ratio of mean tree depth to mean tree width. Mean width is calculated as
the average number of nodes per depth. Larger x-axis values indicate deeper searches, while smaller
values indicate wider searches.
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
Generation Budget
0.055
0.060
0.065
0.070
0.075
RMSLE
Nomad2018
(lower is better)
Repeated Sampling
Sequential Refinement
Standard MCTS
AB-MCTS-M
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
Generation Budget
0.35
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
Log Loss
Spooky Author Identification
(lower is better)
Repeated Sampling
Sequential Refinement
Standard MCTS
AB-MCTS-M
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
Generation Budget
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
ROC AUC
Random Acts of Pizza
(higher is better)
Repeated Sampling
Sequential Refinement
Standard MCTS
AB-MCTS-M
Figure 10: Performance comparison on three MLE-Bench tasks using GPT-4o. Each plot shows
performance versus the total generation budget. For Nomad2018 Predicting Transparent Conductors
and Spooky Author Identification, lower scores are better (RMSLE and Log Loss, respectively); for
Random Acts of Pizza, higher is better (ROC AUC). At each budget, we choose the single solution
based on validation-set performance and report its test-set score.
21

=== PAGE 22 ===
Root
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
125
126
127
128
Nomad2018: AB-MCTS-M
0.032
0.033
0.034
0.035
0.036
0.037
0.038
0.039
Root
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14 15
16
17 18 19 20
21
22
23
24 25
26
27
28
29 30
31 32 33 34 35
36 37 38 39 40
41 42 43 44 45
46 47 48 49 50
51 52 53 54 55
56 57 58 59 60
61 62 63 64 65
66 67 68 69 70
71 72 73 74 75
76 77 78 79 80
81 82 83 84 85
86 87 88 89 90
91 92 93 94 95
96 97 98 99100
101102103104105
106107108109110
111112113114115
116117118119120
121122123124125
126127128
Nomad2018: Standard MCTS
0.032
0.033
0.034
0.035
0.036
0.037
0.038
0.039
Root
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114 115
116
117
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
125
126
127
128
Spooky Author Identification: AB-MCTS-M
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65
Root
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19 20
21 22 23 24 25
26 27 28 29 30
31 32
33
34
35
36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50
51 52 53 54 55
56
57 58 59 60
61 62 63 64 65
66 67 68 69 70
71 72 73 74 75
76 77 78 79 80
81 82
83
84
85
86 87 88 89 90
91 92 93 94 95
96 97 98 99 100101102103104105
106107108109110
111112113114115
116117118119120
121122123124125
126127128
Spooky Author Identification: Standard MCTS
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65
Root
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
125
126
127
128
Random Acts of Pizza: AB-MCTS-M
0.68
0.70
0.72
0.74
0.76
0.78
Root
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
125
126
127
128
Random Acts of Pizza: Standard MCTS
0.68
0.70
0.72
0.74
0.76
0.78
Figure 11: Example search trees generated by AB-MCTS-M and standard MCTS on MLE-
Bench. The example tree for Random Acts of Pizza generated by AB-MCTS-M is the same tree
shown in Figure 7
22

=== PAGE 23 ===
C
Additional Experiments and Analysis
C.1
Results with DeepSeek-V3 on Competitive Programming and ARC-AGI
This appendix provides supplementary results using the DeepSeek-V3 model, focusing on both
overall performance and search behavior characteristics.
Figure 8 shows the performance (Pass@1) with DeepSeek-V3 on the Competitive Programming
(LiveCodeBench, CodeContest) and ARC-AGI benchmarks. While the overall performance trends
were similar to those with GPT-4o (Figure 4), the relative strengths of the baseline methods varied with
DeepSeek-V3. For instance, standard MCTS achieved the highest success rate on LiveCodeBench.
On CodeContest, the performance differences between AB-MCTS and the top-performing baselines
were less pronounced than with GPT-4o. Despite these variations, AB-MCTS variants consistently
placed among the leading methods across all tasks. This indicates that AB-MCTS reliably delivers
strong performance even when changes in the underlying model alter the effectiveness of different
baseline strategies.
The analysis of search tree shape versus performance with DeepSeek-V3 (Figure 9) closely mirrors
the findings from GPT-4o (Figure 5). As expected, repeated sampling forms wide search trees, while
sequential refinement develops deep trees. AB-MCTS methods consistently generated wider trees
compared to standard MCTS. This tendency towards wider exploration is notable even on tasks like
LiveCodeBench with DeepSeek-V3, where sequential refinement outperformed repeated sampling.
The strong performance of AB-MCTS algorithms in such scenarios suggests their ability to not only
explore broadly but also to effectively identify and deepen promising branches through their adaptive
node selection. This highlights the robust nature of AB-MCTS in balancing these competing demands
across different models.
C.2
Results with GPT-4o on three competitions from MLE-Bench
Figure 10 compares AB-MCTS-M against the baseline methods on the three MLE-Bench com-
petitions using GPT-4o, plotting performance scores against the generation budget. Notably, the
most effective baseline varies across these competitions. For instance, on Nomad2018, sequential
refinement ultimately achieves the best score while repeated sampling shows no improvement. On
Spooky Author Identification, standard MCTS exhibits continued improvement throughout the budget
range. Conversely, on Random Acts of Pizza, repeated sampling significantly outperforms other
baselines. Despite this variability in baseline effectiveness, AB-MCTS-M consistently delivers
strong performance across all three competitions. This highlights the robustness and adaptability
of AB-MCTS-M, suggesting its capability to effectively adjust its search approach to the differing
characteristics of each task, especially when the optimal strategy is not apparent beforehand.
C.3
Example search trees generated by each methods on MLE-Bench
Figure 11 presents example search trees generated by AB-MCTS-M and standard MCTS for the three
MLE-Bench competitions. Across all tasks, the trees generated by AB-MCTS-M visually suggest a
more flexible approach compared to standard MCTS, effectively combining broader exploration with
focused exploitation of promising nodes.
Table 4: Comparison between Progressive Widening and AB-MCTS on LiveCodeBench.
(k, α) = (1, 0.45) (k, α) = (5, 0.5) (k, α) = (10, 0.55) AB-MCTS-A (Gaussian) AB-MCTS-A (Beta) AB-MCTS-M
Pass@1
48.7 ±0.8
50.7 ±1.3
50.5 ±3.1
48.9 ±2.0
51.8 ±1.4
49.6 ±1.6
C.4
Comparison to Progressive Widening on LiveCodeBench
To compare the progressive widening with AB-MCTS, we conducted an experiment on Live-
CodeBench for progressive widening with various parameters. We used deepseek-v3-0324 with
a generation budget 27 (n = 5). The results are shown in Table 4. While an adequate progressive
widening parameter leads to strong performance comparable to AB-MCTS, its effectiveness is highly
sensitive to hyperparameters. For example, it produces the worst result with (k, α) = (1, 0.45).
23

=== PAGE 24 ===
Table 5: Comparison of Pass@1 and Pass@2 on ARC-AGI with GPT-4o.
Method
Pass@1
Pass@2
Repeated Sampling
14.0 ± 1.7
15.0 ± 1.0
Sequential Refinement
7.7 ± 0.6
8.7 ± 0.9
Standard MCTS
8.0 ± 1.0
9.0 ± 1.5
AB-MCTS-M
11.0 ± 1.0
12.3 ± 1.2
AB-MCTS-A (Gaussian)
13.0 ± 3.6
13.0 ± 3.6
AB-MCTS-A (Beta)
12.7 ± 0.6
14.0 ± 2.1
Furthermore, the (k, α) = (10, 0.55) setting shows search instability, leading to the highest variance.
In contrast, AB-MCTS is robust without such tuning, demonstrating its practical advantage.
C.5
AB-MCTS-M vs. AB-MCTS-A: Analysis and Selection
This paper introduces two adaptive branching algorithms: AB-MCTS-M and AB-MCTS-A. This
section offers considerations for selecting between them, drawing upon our experimental findings
and their distinct underlying mechanisms.
When outcome quality is the main priority, AB-MCTS-M is often the preferred choice because of its
consistently strong performance (Table 1 and 2). For node selection, this algorithm uses MCMC, an
iterative procedure that improves effectiveness but incurs some computational cost per selection. For
applications with strict time constraints, AB-MCTS-A offers a lighter alternative, as its Gaussian and
Beta variants employ analytically tractable posterior updates. However, when the LLM-inference
time or the time required to evaluate the generated candidate solutions dominate, the extra time spent
on MCMC has little impact on total runtime.
While both algorithms feature adaptive search, Figures 5 and 9 show that AB-MCTS-A tends to
construct wider search trees. This tendency is attributed to its core design: at each depth, AB-
MCTS-A chooses between selecting a GEN node or a CONT node. Reaching depth d requires d
consecutive CONT choices, so deeper paths become geometrically less likely than wider expansions
(see also Section A.4). Therefore, for tasks such as ARC-AGI where broader exploration is considered
particularly beneficial, AB-MCTS-A can be preferable.
Ultimately, the choice depends on the application’s primary goal: AB-MCTS-M often performs
well when outcome quality is prioritized, whereas AB-MCTS-A offers advantages in computational
efficiency and for tasks that benefit from broader exploration. However, both provide capable adaptive
search strategies.
C.6
Pass@1 vs. Pass@2 on ARC-AGI
In Table 1, we reported Pass@2 scores for ARC-AGI to follow the standard evaluation protocol
defined by the benchmark [17]. For completeness and transparency, we also report the corresponding
Pass@1 results in Table 5. As shown in Table 5, the results indicate consistent relative performance
between Pass@1 and Pass@2. In particular, the ranking of methods remains unchanged, confirming
that the conclusions presented in the main text are robust to the evaluation metric.
C.7
Analysis of Adaptive Search Behavior via Node Degree Distribution
To gain a granular view of the adaptive nature of our methods, we analyze the node degree distribution
of the search trees generated on LiveCodeBench with DeepSeek-V3, illustrated in Figure 12. The
results show two distinct behaviors. AB-MCTS-M clearly favors a depth-focused search, with
around 90% of its non-leaf nodes having a small degree (1–3). However, its long-tail distribution,
with degrees up to 40, confirms that it adaptively broadens the search when required. In contrast,
AB-MCTS-A performs a much wider search. Low-degree nodes (1–3) account for only about 30% of
its non-leaf nodes, and the distribution spreads broadly, with degrees exceeding 100. This adaptive
shaping of the search tree, which differs starkly from the more rigid patterns of baselines, provides
strong evidence for the flexibility of our framework.
24

=== PAGE 25 ===
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Node Degree
10
3
10
2
10
1
100
101
102
Frequency (%)
Node Degree Distribution
Repeated Sampling
Sequential Refinement
Standard MCTS
AB-MCTS-M
AB-MCTS-A (Gaussian)
AB-MCTS-A (Beta)
Figure 12: Node-degree distribution reveals the adaptive search nature of our methods. The plot
displays the frequency of nodes (y-axis, log scale) for each degree (x-axis) under a search budget of
N = 128.
Table 6: Performance of Standard MCTS with Different Fixed Branching Factors (w) on
LiveCodeBench. Pass@1 scores are reported. The best result is shown in bold.
Metric
w = 3
w = 5
w = 10
Pass@1
0.429 ± 0.018
0.432 ± 0.021
0.402 ± 0.015
C.8
Ablation on the Fixed Branching Factor w in Standard MCTS
We tested standard MCTS with fixed branching factors (w) of 3, 5, and 10 on LiveCodeBench
using DeepSeek-V3. The results are summarized in Table 6. We find that w = 5 achieves the best
performance among the tested values. Crucially, performance degrades with both smaller and larger
widths, highlighting the sensitivity of the baseline to this hyperparameter. This finding underscores
a key advantage of our adaptive method, which dynamically adjusts the effective branching factor
during the search.
C.9
Robustness of AB-MCTS Performance
In other baseline methods, the branching factor is either predetermined or determined by hyperpa-
rameters. For example, we need to predefine the branching factor in standard MCTS. However, the
efficiency of the width vs depth strongly depends on the type of tasks and LLMs. This is reflected in
Table 1 and Table 2, where AB-MCTS shows robust performance across various task types, while
other methods excel for some tasks, but not for others. This is due to the adaptive branching nature
of AB-MCTS, where the algorithm adapts to the wide or deep direction depending on the observed
rewards. This is beneficial in the context of LLM inference-time scaling, since recently LLM has been
used for solving various kinds of tasks, e.g., math tasks, coding tasks, etc., and a search algorithm
that works for various task types out of the box is in high demand.
C.10
Towards Pushing the Pareto Frontier of LLM Inference-Time Scaling
In this section, we propose the following two potential directions for future work aimed at pushing
the Pareto frontier of LLM inference-time scaling:
1. Enhanced Adaptivity via Difficulty Estimation: We propose to enhance our algorithm’s
existing depth-width balancing by explicitly estimating problem difficulty from collected
rewards. For difficult problems (identified by low rewards), the strategy would dynamically
25

=== PAGE 26 ===
switch, e.g., from a deep search (AB-MCTS-M) to a wide one (AB-MCTS-A). This is
motivated by findings that optimal search strategies depend on difficulty [27].
2. Collaborative Search with Multiple LLMs: We also propose a method that leverages
the diverse strengths of different LLMs within a single search. This is implemented by
extending AB-MCTS with multiple GEN nodes, one for each LLM.
We elaborate on the specific methodology and preliminary experimental results for the second
direction (Collaborative Search) in Section D.
D
Multi-LLM AB-MCTS
Depending on the task, using more than one LLM for answer search [43] can be advantageous. For
example, if LLM A can generate more diverse initial answers and LLM B excels at refinement,
building the answer tree with both models is expected to improve performance. This section
demonstrates how AB-MCTS can be extended to scenarios in which multiple LLMs are available
for answer generation, and also reports the experimental results for ARC-AGI-2, demonstrating the
effectiveness of the proposed method.
D.1
Method
D.1.1
Multiple LLMs as Answer Generators
Suppose L LLMs are available for answer generation. We denote by f l
LLM the answer generator
implemented by the l-th LLM, with l = 1, . . . , L, following the notation introduced in Equation 2.
The overall procedure is identical to the single-LLM AB-MCTS (Algorithm 1), with the addition of
a step to select one of the L available generators for node expansion. This selection occurs at each
expansion phase, utilizing the current state of the answer tree T. The chosen generator, f l
LLM, is then
used to expand the selected node. We introduce two distinct algorithms for this generator selection
process.
D.1.2
Generator Selection Algorithm I: Single GEN Node
In this algorithm, node selection proceeds identically to AB-MCTS, followed by an additional
generator selection step. During this step, each node N in the entire answer tree T is annotated with
the index l of the generator that produced it. For every generator, we obtain the set of nodes Nl ⊆T,
containing all nodes it has generated; Nl is empty if the generator has not been selected yet. The
scores of the nodes in Nl are used to calculate the posterior distribution of the expected score of
a new node that will be generated by the generator l. After all L posteriors have been computed,
Thompson sampling is applied: a single sample is drawn from each distribution, and the generator
with the highest sample is selected for the node expansion. These posteriors are modeled in the same
way as the distributions used for node expansion target selection, as detailed below.
Multi-LLM AB-MCTS-M with Generator Selection Algorithm I. In this algorithm, Multi-LLM
AB-MCTS-M treats the generators as groups within the mixed-effects model defined as
r ˜
N = αl + σyϵ ˜
N,
αl = µα + σαϵl,
(22)
ϵ ˜
N ∼N(0, 1),
ϵl ∼N(0, 1),
(23)
where the group index j has been replaced by the generator index l from Equations 9–10. As for
the prior distributions, we can use the ones in Equation 11. After calculating the score posterior
distributions using Nl for all l, we perform Thompson sampling to select one generator.
Multi-LLM AB-MCTS-A with Generator Selection Algorithm I. In this algorithm, Multi-LLM
AB-MCTS-A assigns each l-th generator an independent prior–Gaussian (Equations 12-17) or Beta
(Equations 18-20)–depending on the score metric, and updates these priors to posteriors using the
scores of the nodes in Nl. After calculating the posteriors for all l, we perform Thompson sampling
to choose a generator.
26

=== PAGE 27 ===
D.1.3
Generator Selection Algorithm II: Multiple GEN Nodes
An alternative approach attaches multiple GEN nodes as children to every node in the tree–one for
each of the L available generators. At each node N in the expansion target selection process, the
following process occurs:
1. The AB-MCTS selection logic is applied independently within the sub-trees associated with
each generator. This means that for each generator l, we run a selection process considering
its associated GEN node and any child nodes previously generated by it from node N.
2. Thompson sampling is used to identify the best node (either the GEN node or an existing
child node) for each generator l.
3. Finally, the scores of the L best nodes selected in the previous step are compared, and the
one with the highest overall score is selected.
This algorithm is designed to better capture the local context of the search tree, allowing for the
adaptive selection of the most suitable generator at each specific stage of the solution process.
D.2
Experiments
In this section, we evaluate the effectiveness of Multi-LLM AB-MCTS by reporting the results and
analysis of ARC-AGI-2 [44]. ARC-AGI-2 is an enhanced benchmark building upon the original
ARC-AGI, specifically designed to assess higher-level cognitive abilities of artificial intelligence
systems rigorously. It maintains the same fundamental principles as ARC-AGI, emphasizing tasks that
require general fluid intelligence rather than extensive prior knowledge or memorization. We selected
this benchmark, which is hard to solve even for frontier LLMs (less than 5% success rate [44]), to
assess whether we can combine multiple frontier reasoning LLMs to obtain better performance for
challenging tasks.
D.2.1
Experimental Setup
In this experiment, we evaluated our approach on the 120 problems comprising the public eval-
uation set of ARC-AGI-2. For each problem, the generation budget was set to 250. The solu-
tion generation and refinement procedures are the same as those of ARC-AGI-1 experiment: The
models were instructed to generate the transformation rule as Python code, and the search was
guided by a reward signal corresponding to the number of demonstration cases correctly solved
by the generated code. For solution generation, we used three frontier reasoning models: Gemini-
2.5 Pro (gemini-2.5-pro-preview-05-06) [45], o4-mini (o4-mini-2025-04-16) [46],
and DeepSeek-R1-0528 (deepseek-r1-0528) [22]. The temperature is set to be 0.6 for all the
models.
To primarily evaluate the potential of Multi-LLM AB-MCTS, we used the Pass@k metric. This metric
measures whether at least one correct solution is found within k attempts. This differs from the official
ARC-AGI-2 contest standard, which typically uses a Pass@2 criterion (i.e., one of two submitted
final answers must be correct). Evaluating Pass@2 requires an additional selection mechanism to
identify promising candidates from the search history. Therefore, this experiment focuses on the
search capability itself via Pass@k. Due to the significant API costs of the used frontier reasoning
models, we focused on the evaluation of Single-LLM AB-MCTS-A and Multi-LLM AB-MCTS-A
(and repeated sampling for o4-mini), since it worked most efficiently in our experiment on ARC-
AGI-1. Also, we employed the generator selection algorithm II (see Section D.1.3 for details) for our
experiments.
D.2.2
Results
The performance of our proposed methods was compared against a repeated sampling, which was
the most efficient method for the ARC-AGI-1 experiment, and the result is shown in Fig. 13. As
shown, Repeated Sampling using the o4-mini model achieved a 23% Pass@k success rate on the
public evaluation set, and the single-model AB-MCTS using o4-mini improved the success rate to
27.5%. The performance advantage of AB-MCTS over Repeated Sampling becomes more evident as
the generation budget increases, particularly after approximately 50 budget.
27

=== PAGE 28 ===
Performance of AB-MCTS
Multi-LLM AB-MCTS
o4-mini
DeepSeek-R1-0528
Gemini-2.5-Pro
o4-mini + Gemini-2.5-Pro
o4-mini + Gemini-2.5-Pro + R1-0528
Success Rate (Pass@k)
0.05
0.00
0.25
0.30
0.20
0.15
0.10
Number of LLM Calls (k)
0
50
100
200
150
250
o4-mini (Repeated Sampling)
Figure 13: Pass@k (coverage) of ARC-AGI-2 for each generation budget. The methods tested are
repeated sampling, AB-MCTS, and Multi-LLM AB-MCTS methods.
Gemini-2.5-Pro
R1-0528
o4-mini
Solved
Figure 14: Distribution of LLM usage in the 120 ARC-AGI-2 problems with Multi-LLM AB-MCTS-
A. Trials are sorted by the maximum reward obtained from demonstration cases (higher reward to the
left). Starred trials indicate a correct final solution was found.
By employing Multi-LLM AB-MCTS, which integrates Gemini-2.5-Pro and DeepSeek-R1-0528, we
further improved the performance, ultimately finding correct solutions for over 30% of the problems.
Notably, although DeepSeek-R1-0528 exhibited lower individual performance, its integration into
the Multi-LLM framework led to an increase in the number of solved problems.
D.2.3
Analysis
The Multi-LLM AB-MCTS framework demonstrated an ability to effectively allocate different LLMs
to problems based on their characteristics. As illustrated in Figure 14, the distribution of LLM
usage varied across problems. For trials that quickly achieved a high reward from the demonstration
cases (left side of the figure), the more proficient model tended to be assigned. Conversely, for trials
where obtaining a high reward was more challenging (right side), the models were utilized in a more
balanced manner.
Furthermore, we observed instances where problems unsolvable by any single LLM were solved
through the collaboration of multiple models. This suggests a synergistic interaction that transcends
simply matching the best model to a problem. Figure 15 and Figure 16 depict a search process
where an incorrect solution generated by o4-mini served as a useful hint for DeepSeek-R1-0528
and Gemini-2.5-Pro, which then collaboratively produced the correct solution. This result indicates
28

=== PAGE 29 ===
Example Search Tree by Multi-LLM AB-MCTS
Gemini-2.5-Pro
R1-0528
Solved
o4-mini
Figure 15: An example search tree from a successful trial on ARC-AGI-2 using Multi-LLM AB-
MCTS-A. The number in each node indicates the generation step, and the color represents the selected
LLM. The yellow node generated the code that correctly solved the test case. This problem was not
solved by any single model in isolation.
Test set
Correct 🎉
Test set
Wrong 💀
Solution generated by o4-mini
New solution refined by DeepSeek-R1-0528
Training set
?
Test set
Problem: 36a08778
Analysis of the previous solution by DeepSeek-R1-0528
After analyzing the discrepancies between the current implementation and the expected out-
puts, I identified two main issues:
1. Missing Cell Coloring During Horizontal Spread: When the flood function encountered a 
gap (a cell below with value 7), it broke the spread without coloring the current cell. This 
caused cells that should become water (6) to remain empty (7).
2. Global Visited Sets Causing Skipped Processing: The visited sets were shared across 
all seed processing, preventing multiple seeds from properly interacting with cells processed 
by earlier seeds. This disrupted the natural water flow simulation.
The solution involves:
1. Adding cell coloring at gap locations during horizontal spread before initiating a drop
2. Removing the global visited sets entirely since grid state changes naturally prevent repro-
cessing
3. Maintaining recursion limits for deep but finite grids
Corners are not filled.
Much of the code is shared.
The error made by o4-mini has been
analyzed and successfully corrected.
Figure 16: An illustration of model collaboration. In this example, DeepSeek-R1-0528 refines an
incorrect intermediate solution generated by o4-mini (from the problem shown in Figure 15) to
produce the final correct solution.
29

=== PAGE 30 ===
that Multi-LLM AB-MCTS can facilitate flexible and effective collaboration among heterogeneous
frontier LLMs.
D.3
Challenges and Future Work
While our primary evaluation focused on search capability using the Pass@k metric, we conducted
a preliminary evaluation based on the Pass@2 criterion for reference. Using a simple rule-based
method to select two final answers (prioritizing code with a high reward generated later in the search),
the Multi-LLM AB-MCTS achieved a Pass@2 of 19.2%. Although this is a promising result, a
significant gap of over 10 percentage points remains compared to the 30% Pass@250 rate. Future
work should focus on closing this gap by developing more sophisticated final-answer selection
algorithms. Potential directions include building more accurate reward models or integrating an
LLM-as-a-Judge for a more nuanced evaluation of candidate solutions.
30
